                           C H A P T E R           4
                                                       4
                                                       The Scientific Revolution

                           O      N OCTOBER 11, 1572, THE DANISH ASTRONOMER TYCHO BRAHE
                                  (1546–1601) observed a bright new object in the evening sky. This was “a
                           miracle indeed,” since this object did not move against the background of fixed
                           stars and must itself have been a star. Yet Aristotle had taught that everything in
                           the celestial region, the sphere of fixed stars, was perfect and unchanging. Brahe’s
                           observation of what we now believe to have been a supernova (a new star) was one
                           of the many developments that led to the eventual overthrow of the Aristotelian
                           geocentric (Earth-centered) astronomical system and the medieval worldview based
                           upon it.
                                By the 14th century, the social, political, and intellectual order of the medieval
                           world had begun to break down. Increased urbanization and the return to a money
                           economy eroded the structure of the feudal system, and the rise of nation-states
                           undermined the political authority of the papacy. Intermittent wars between the
                           emerging nation-states led to a severe economic depression. This was followed by
                           the plague of 1348–1350, later known as the “Black Death,” which decimated the
                           European population and bred doubt and resentment against the medieval Church,
                           the dominant authority. Although the Church embraced Aristotle’s philosophy, the
                           threat posed by its naturalism and rationalism generated dissent and division, lead-
                           ing initially to attempts to divorce the separate realms of faith and reason and then
                           to the autonomous emergence of naturalistic empirical science.
                                Various developments contributed to the transformation of the intellec-
                           tual landscape. Marco Polo’s (1254–1324) exploration of China, Christopher
                           Columbus’s (1451–1506) discovery of America in 1492, and Magellan’s (1480–
                           1521) circumnavigation of the globe expanded the horizons of the known world.
                           Perhaps the most significant development was the invention of printing and the
                           consequent transformation of communication. In the city of Mainz in south-
                           ern Germany, Johann Gutenberg (c. 1397–1468) created movable type and pub-
                           lished an edition of the Bible in 1450. The consequent explosion in printed works
                           expanded intellectual horizons by broadening access to the Bible and classical
                           works. By 1500, about 8 million volumes had been printed (Pyenson & Sheets-
                           Pyenson, 1999); by 1600, about 20 million, with over a dozen presses established
                           in European cities (Foote, 1991). The critical interpretation of these works by
          100




gre58624_ch04.indd   100                                                                                         12/14/07   2:55:24 PM
                                                                              RENAISSANCE AND REFORMATION   101


              humanist scholars encouraged a more secular—and more skeptical—approach to
              the classical tradition and scriptural authority, and the reliable reproduction of
              works in physics, astronomy, and medicine transformed science into a public
              enterprise. In earlier centuries the works of Aristotle, Ptolemy, and Galen had
              been transcribed by hand by monastic clerics, with errors compounded over
              generations, and read only by the educated elite. From the mid-15th century
              onwards multiple copies of scientific works were critically scrutinized by the
              scientific community and educated members of the lay public.
                   Critical questioning of the classical tradition and scriptural authority was par-
              alleled by the critical and empirical evaluation of the theories of Aristotle, Ptolemy,
              and Galen during the period of the 16th and 17th centuries in Europe known as
              the scientific revolution. As their theories were displaced by those of Nicholaus
              Copernicus (1473–1543), Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), Galileo, Newton, and
              Vesalius, empirical evaluation displaced the authority of tradition as the mark of
              modern science. Quantified efficient causal explanation of matter in motion dis-
              placed final causal explanation in the new physics, and eventually these mecha-
              nistic forms of explanation were extended to the realm of biology and psychology
              by theorists such as Gomez Pereira (1500–c. 1558), William Harvey (1578–1657),
              Descartes, Julien Offroy de La Mettrie (1709–1751), Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679),
              and Robert Whytt (1714–1766).



              RENAISSANCE AND REFORMATION

              The Renaissance, meaning “rebirth,” originated in southern Italy in the 14th
              century, eventually spreading to Northern Europe. It promoted innovative devel-
              opments in art, literature, architecture, music, mathematics, and—eventually—
              religion and science. Humanistic thinkers such as Francesco Petrarch (1304–1374),
              Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463–1494), and Desiderius Erasmus (c. 1466–
              1536) were highly critical of the institutional hierarchy and dogmatism of the
              established church and recommended a return to a more personal relationship
              with God. With greater access to classical literature, Renaissance humanists redis-
              covered the ancient Greek theorists and found much to admire in their focus
              upon the psychology of human life. They rediscovered Plato, who came to rival
              Aristotle as the classical authority, although Aristotle continued to be admired
              for his original works, as opposed to the sterile appropriations of his natural phi-
              losophy that had become fossilized as church dogma. Indeed, the Renaissance
              deserves to be characterized as a period of rediscovery as much as rebirth, since
              it was largely grounded in the recovery and retranslation of classical texts, which
              came to be admired for their intrinsic merits and celebration of humanity.
                   Petrarch is often treated as the founder of Renaissance humanism, insofar as
              his writings heralded the increased focus on the psychology of human individuals,




gre58624_ch04.indd   101                                                                                    12/24/07   5:29:51 PM
          102 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           including their place in the social and political order. Petrarch was critical of the
                           sterility of scholastic thought and particularly the overly rigid Aristotelianism at
                           the heart of Christian dogma. He celebrated the critical and naturalistic thought of
                           the ancients and their focus on human capacities and potential. In religion, he rec-
                           ommended a return to the more personal and spiritual form of religion practiced
                           by Augustine, presaging the later Protestant Reformation.
                                The Renaissance commitment to human potential was expressed in Pico’s
                           famous oration on the dignity of humanity, in which he located humankind as
                           poised between the lower animals and the angels: capable of degenerating to bes-
                           tiality, but also endowed with almost unlimited potential for creative intellectual,
                           moral, and spiritual development. According to Pico, God had allowed humans to
                           determine the limits of their own nature.
                                Somewhat paradoxically, in Renaissance humanism faith in the potential
                           of humanity went hand in hand with skepticism about human pretensions to
                           knowledge. Erasmus, in The Praise of Folly (1512), caricatured the dogmatic and
                           superstitious beliefs of medieval scholasticism and contrasted the pretentious cer-
                           emony and hierarchy of the Church with the simple humility and humanity of
                           Christ. Paracelsus rejected the classical authority of Galen and Avicenna in the
                           realm of medicine, which he claimed should be founded upon empirical learning,
                           although his own practice was heavily infused with astrology and mysticism.
                                The cautious skepticism of earlier humanists was eclipsed by the radical skep-
                           ticism of Michel de Montaigne (1533–1592), who resurrected the arguments of
                           Greek skeptics such as Pyrrho. He maintained that neither sense experience nor
                           reason could yield knowledge of the natural and spiritual world. While few shared
                           Montaigne’s depth of skepticism, his advocacy of such an extreme position stimu-
                           lated later defenses of autonomous rationality and the scientific method, notably
                           those advanced by Descartes and Bacon.
                                The Renaissance promoted pioneering explorations of human nature in the art
                           and anatomy of Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519), the political writings of Niccolò
                           Machiavelli (1469–1527), and the poetry and drama of William Shakespeare
                           (1564–1616), but did little to advance the systematic scientific study of human
                           psychology. However, it did witness the first attempts to apply medical and psy-
                           chological theories to the development of education, most notably in the work of
                           the Spanish humanist Juan Luis Vives (1492–1540). Born in Valencia, Vives was
                           educated at the universities of Paris and Louvain, where he befriended Erasmus. His
                           reputation as a teacher and scholar in the Netherlands later earned him a position
                           at Oxford University (from 1523–1528), where he was supported by Thomas More
                           and Henry VIII. After Henry’s dispute with More over his divorce from Catherine
                           of Aragon and More’s subsequent execution, Vives returned to the Netherlands.
                           There he completed De Anima et Vita (1538), in which he argued that knowledge
                           of human physiology and psychology should be applied to the improvement of
                           educational practice and the humane treatment of the insane.




gre58624_ch04.indd   102                                                                                       12/14/07   2:55:24 PM
                                                                                    RENAISSANCE AND REFORMATION   103


                   Vives is best remembered for his comprehensive treatment of the associative
              principles of similarity, contrast, and contiguity (Brett, 1912–1921), which has led
              some to characterize him as the “father of modern psychology” (Clemens, 1967).
              Although his treatment of association followed Aristotle’s general account, Vives
              tried to link the operation of memory to humoral physiology and cited many
              more examples of associationist principles than Aristotle. In many respects, Vives
              was a transitional figure, who retained great respect for classical authorities and
              deviated little from them in practice, but also conceived of the study of human
              psychology as a form of naturalistic knowledge grounded in observation:

                     The study of man’s soul exercises a most helpful influence on all kinds of knowl-
                     edge. . . . This treatment of the development of knowledge within our souls will
                     proceed parallel with the natural order.
                                                           —(De Disciplinis, cited in Clemens, 1967, p. 221)



              Reformation

              Dissatisfaction with the sterility, pomp, and hierarchy of the medieval Church
              eventually produced the religious movement known as the Reformation, spear-
              headed by Martin Luther (1483–1546), the Augustinian monk and professor at
              Wittenberg University who initiated the movement by nailing his 95 objections
              to the door of Wittenberg Cathedral in 1517. Luther’s revolt was motivated by his
              objections to the Church’s sale of indulgences (papal pardons for sins), a form of
              fund-raising promoted by the revolution in printing, which also enabled Luther’s
              objections to be rapidly disseminated throughout Europe. Luther advocated a sim-
              pler and more spiritual approach to God and initially hoped for internal reform
              within the Church. However, he later rejected the philosophy of Aristotle and the
              authority of the pope, which led to his excommunication in 1521.
                   The form of Protestant religion originally developed by Luther, who empha-
              sized individual faith, conscience, and attention to scripture in contrast to the
              hierarchical pomp and ritual of the established Church, represented an intellec-
              tual liberation of sorts. However, it very quickly rigidified into its own forms of
              institutionalized dogma as Protestantism spread throughout Europe. The ideal of
              individual conscience was converted into the ideal of conscience in obedience to
              scripture as interpreted by Luther and John Calvin (1509–1564), whose uncom-
              promising doctrines about predestination exemplified a harsh and unforgiving
              attitude to sin. As the reformers attained positions of authority and power in Prot-
              estant states and provinces, they were at least as zealous in their persecution of
              heretics and dissenters as the traditional medieval Church.
                   One consequence of the Protestant Reformation was the institutional con-
              firmation of the Aristotelian theories of Aquinas as the doctrinal foundation of




gre58624_ch04.indd    103                                                                                         12/14/07   2:55:25 PM
          104 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           Roman Catholicism, as affirmed by the Council of Trent (1545–1563). It also seems
                           to have encouraged a more vigorous and violent response to heretics, witches, and
                           other dissenters by the Catholic Inquisition. The late 15th and 16th centuries
                           marked the high point of religious repression in Europe, including the suppression
                           of scientific works and the persecution of individual scientists.
                                Michael Servetus (c. 1511–1533), the Spanish anatomist who rejected Galen’s
                           account of the circulation of the blood in the heart and who was one of the first
                           to identify pulmonary circulation, made the mistake of sending a copy of his
                           “On the Restoration of Christianity” to John Calvin in Geneva. Calvin denounced
                           Servetus to the Catholic Inquisition, and he was arrested and sentenced to death
                           by burning. Servetus managed to escape, but he was later recaptured in Geneva
                           and burned by Protestant reformers, while the Catholic Inquisition burned his
                           effigy and his books. Although Servetus was persecuted for his religious rather
                           than his medical views, the Reformation did little to promote the spirit of intel-
                           lectual curiosity that motivated him.



                           THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION

                           The period characterized as the scientific revolution was marked by revolutions
                           in theory, particularly in astronomy, physics, and medicine. The most famous
                           of these was the overthrow of the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic geocentric (Earth-
                           centered) theory in favor of the Copernican heliocentric (sun-centered) theory.
                           According to Ptolemaic theory, the fixed Earth is the center of the universe, with
                           the sun and other planets revolving in circular orbits around it. Yet since the time
                           of Aristotle, it had been known that planets do not move in perfect circular orbits.
                           As observed from Earth, their orbits appear to be erratic, looping backward in
                           their paths from time to time. To accommodate this “wandering,” or retrograde,
                           motion, Ptolemy had introduced a system of epicycles, or circles within circles,
                           and this system had been modified and extended to a level of great complexity by
                           later astronomers. The Ptolemaic theory served as an effective predictive and navi-
                           gational device for centuries and was in accord with common sense. The planets
                           appear in motion to the naked eye, and everyday experience seems to confirm a
                           stationary Earth (we don’t feel it moving, and don’t fall off).


                           The Copernican Revolution

                           Nicholaus Copernicus was a Polish monk who studied at the universities of Cracow,
                           Bologna, Ferrara, and Padua. He advanced his heliocentric theory in On the Revo-
                           lution of the Celestial Spheres, published in 1543. In this work, Copernicus argued
                           that the motions of the planets might be better explained by supposing that the




gre58624_ch04.indd   104                                                                                      12/14/07   2:55:25 PM
                                                                                          THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION   105


              sun, not Earth, is the fixed center of the universe and that Earth and other planets
              traverse circular orbits around it.
                   This was not a new hypothesis. Aristarchus (c. 310–c. 230 BCE) had first advanced
              it about 1,800 years earlier. Copernicus noted this and also ascribed an earlier ver-
              sion of his theory to the Pythagorean mathematician Philolaus (b. c. 480–480 BCE).
              Many were skeptical of the Ptolemaic system, since its complexity seemed incon-
              sistent with Pythagorean requirements of simplicity and harmony. This was the
              view, for example, of Domenico Novara, professor of mathematics and astronomy
              at the University of Bologna, during the period Copernicus was in attendance.
                   Copernicus’s heliocentric theory accommodated the same observational data as
              the developed geocentric theory. However, Copernicus was not able to do away with
              Ptolemy’s system of epicycles, although he was able to reduce their number. Coperni-
              cus eliminated one serious anomaly of the geocentric theory, concerning the orbital
              times of planets. According to the geocentric theory, the moon, the closest planet
              to Earth, completes its orbit in four weeks, whereas the sun, which is furthest from
              Earth, takes only one day. According to the heliocentric theory, the orbital times of
              the planets vary inversely with their distance from the sun. Copernicus also provided
              an explanation of observed changes in planetary brightness, a problem for the geo-
              centric theory but a natural consequence of the heliocentric theory (Dolling, Gianelli,
              & Statile, 2003). However, the Copernican theory had its own problems, notably the
              failure to detect stellar parallax, the variation in the angular separation of the stars,
              which was a crucial implication of Earth’s projected orbit around the sun.
                   Copernicus’s work was published posthumously, although his delay in pub-
              lishing appears to have had more to do with his anticipation of the incredulity
              with which he thought his theory was likely to be received than out of any fear
              of persecution by the Church. Summaries of his conclusions had been circulated
              for years before, and one was published in 1540. It was not until Kepler’s force-
              ful advocacy of the Copernican theory in the late 1590s and the publication of
              Galileo’s Letters on the Solar Spots (1613/1957) that the Copernican theory encoun-
              tered serious opposition from the Church.

              Realism and Instrumentalism The publication of On the Revolution of the Celestial
              Spheres initially encountered less opposition than might have been expected partly
              because the Lutheran theologian Andreas Osiander (1498–1552), who had been
              authorized to see Copernicus’s work through the press after his death, added an
              introduction. Osiander suggested that Copernicus’s work ought not to be read as
              a potentially true description of astronomical reality (of the relative positions and
              motions of the planets), but as a useful mathematical fiction that accommodated
              the planetary motions:

                     For it is the job of the astronomer to use painstaking and skilled observation in gath-
                     ering together the history of the celestial movements, and then—since he cannot by




gre58624_ch04.indd    105                                                                                             12/14/07   2:55:25 PM
          106 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION

                               any line of reasoning reach the true causes of these movements—to think up or con-
                               struct whatever causes or hypotheses he pleases such that, by the assumption of these
                               causes, those same movements can be calculated from the principles of geometry for
                               the past and for the future too . . . For it is not necessary that these hypotheses should
                               be true, or even probably; but it is enough that they provide a calculus which fits the
                               observations.
                                                                                                   —(1543/2003, p. 43)


                                Osiander was an instrumentalist, a proponent of the view that scientific theories
                           are merely calculative devices or “fictions” employed to predict observations or
                           “save the appearances” and that the best theory is simply the most economical
                           predictive device. Copernicus himself was almost certainly a realist, a proponent of
                           the view that theories purport to describe reality and that the best theory is the one
                           that provides the most accurate description of reality, as were later defenders of the
                           Copernican system such as Galileo and Kepler. Kepler, who revealed the identity
                           of Osiander as the author of the introduction to On the Revolution of the Celestial
                           Spheres in the New Astronomy (1609), claimed that he founded astronomy on real
                           causes and not fictional hypotheses.
                                Not all theologians shared Osiander’s instrumentalist views. The Jesuit
                           Christopher Clavius (1538–1612), who was also a realist, argued that Copernicus
                           had simply saved the appearances by deducing true observational predictions
                           from false theoretical assumptions. Clavius noted that there was nothing remark-
                           able about this, since true conclusions (or predictions) can be deduced from any
                           number of false assumptions. Thus, to take a modern example, the true conclusion
                           “all metals are conductors” can be deduced from the true premises “all metals are
                           elements with free electrons in their outer shells” and “all elements with free elec-
                           trons in their outer shells are conductors” and from the false premises “all metals
                           are elements containing electronic fluids” and “all elements containing electronic
                           fluids are conductors.” According to Clavius, the Copernican theory was simply
                           false and inferior to the Ptolemaic theory, which he held to be consistent with
                           both the principles of astronomy and Christian theology.

                           The Reception of the Copernican Theory These sorts of considerations led the
                           Inquisition, under Cardinal Bellarmine (1542–1621), to adopt the view that the
                           Copernican theory could be judged superior to the Ptolemaic theory only in terms
                           of its economy as a mathematical model or calculation device and that to defend
                           its physical truth was “formally heretical.” On the Revolution of the Celestial Spheres
                           was placed on the Catholic Index of Prohibited Books in 1616.
                                Galileo Galilei (1564–1642), who had indicated his support for the Coperni-
                           can theory in Letters on the Solar Spots (1613/1957), was warned about the judg-
                           ment of the Inquisition. For a few years he remained quiet, and the new Pope
                           Urban VIII turned a blind eye to the unorthodox doctrines that Galileo advanced




gre58624_ch04.indd   106                                                                                                    12/14/07   2:55:25 PM
                                                                                  THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION   107


              in The Assayer (1623/1957). However, in 1632 Galileo published Dialogue Concern-
              ing the Two Chief World-Systems, Ptolemaic and Copernican. This work was immedi-
              ately prohibited, and the following year Galileo was imprisoned. Rheumatic and
              near blind at age 70, he was examined by the Inquisition and shown the instru-
              ments of torture. He was ordered to do penance for three years (while under house
              arrest) and to recant the Copernican doctrine. According to legend, at the end of
              his recantation he muttered under his breath “And yet it moves.” The Catholic
              Church absolved him of his intellectual sins in 1992.
                   Others were not so lucky. It was bad enough that Copernicus had undermined
              the Aristotelian thesis, so congenial to Christian theology, that Earth and human-
              kind are at the privileged center of creation, by suggesting that Earth is just one of
              the many planets orbiting the sun. The Dominican monk and astronomer Giordano
              Bruno (1548–1600) went one stage further and suggested that Earth is merely one
              (insignificant) planet among many in an infinite universe. In On the Infinite Universe
              and Worlds (1584/1950) Bruno declared that the debate between the Aristotelians
              and Copernicans about whether Earth or the sun is the center of the universe is
              vacuous, since “as the universe is infinite, no body can properly be said to be in
              the center of the universe or at the frontier thereof.” In 1592, after many years of
              wandering Europe, Bruno unwisely let himself fall within the reach of the Inquisi-
              tion. After seven years in prison, he was finally tried and condemned to death by
              burning at the stake (although it is unlikely that he was condemned to death for
              his scientific views—he also denied the Immaculate Conception and identified the
              pope with the Beast of Revelations).
                   Although the Copernican system eventually came to displace the Ptolemaic
              system, the “Copernican revolution” in astronomy was not an overnight affair.
              As late as 1669, the year Isaac Newton attained his professorship at Cambridge
              University, the Ptolemaic theory was still being defended, and opposition to the
              Copernican theory continued in France into the 18th century. At the time of
              Copernicus, there were no empirical grounds for preferring his system to that
              of Ptolemy, since both theoretical systems accommodated most of the available
              observational data.
                   Gradually fortunes shifted in favor of the Copernican theory. Johannes
              Kepler (1571–1630) was a dedicated Pythagorean who believed that God had
              created the world in accord with mathematical harmonies. He was employed as
              a research assistant to Tycho Brahe (1546–1601), the Danish astronomer, when
              the latter took up the position of royal mathematician at the court of the Ger-
              man King Rudolph II in Prague (where he was engaged in the preparation of
              military horoscopes). Working with Brahe’s mass of accumulated observational
              data, which he inherited upon Brahe’s death in 1601, Kepler eliminated many of
              the artificialities of the Copernican theory by supposing that the planets move in
              elliptical rather than circular orbits around the sun. In the New Astronomy (1609),
              he demonstrated that the orbital velocities of the planets vary with their distance




gre58624_ch04.indd   107                                                                                      12/14/07   2:55:26 PM
          108 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           from the sun, increasing as they approach the sun and decreasing as they move
                           away from it.
                                In addition, after hearing of the invention of the telescope by Dutch lens craft-
                           ers, Galileo immediately constructed his own and proceeded with record speed to
                           observe the mountains and valleys of the moon, the moons of Jupiter, the phases
                           of Venus, and the rings of Saturn, as well as a multitude of previously undetected
                           stars. These observations undermined the general Aristotelian and Ptolemaic posi-
                           tion. The mountains and valleys of the moon indicated that at least one celestial
                           body is not perfectly spherical, and the observation of new stars indicated that
                           the stars are at different distances from Earth and not fixed to a celestial sphere.
                           The moons of Jupiter appeared to constitute a miniature Copernican system, since
                           their orbits vary with their distance from Jupiter, and the phases of Venus could
                           only be explained in terms of a sun-centered orbit.
                                None of this demonstrated the outright superiority of the Copernican theory,
                           but it convinced many people. The crucial observation came with the telescopic
                           observation of the stellar parallax predicted by the Copernican theory alone,
                           although most astronomers had already abandoned the Ptolemaic theory by the
                           time this was observed by Friedrich Bessel (1784–1846) in 1838, nearly 300 years
                           after the publication of Copernicus’s theory.



                           Galileo and the New Science

                           The scientific revolution was more than a revolution in astronomical—and physical
                           and medical—theories: It amounted to a full-scale revolution in intellectual atti-
                           tude. Prior to this time, many scholars were content to assess theoretical claims
                           by reference to their consistency with classical and religious authorities. Famously,
                           some of Galileo’s colleagues at the University of Pisa refused to look through his
                           telescope because they considered it redundant: They maintained that astronomical
                           questions had already been settled by Aristotle and scripture. Yet from around the
                           16th century onward, natural philosophers came to adopt the view that theories
                           ought not to be accepted until they have been empirically tested, ideally via what
                           came to be known as a crucial experiment, enabling scientists to adjudicate between
                           competing theoretical explanations of the same range of empirical data. They even-
                           tually became what the ancients and medievals had deplored, empiriks.
                                Galileo best epitomized this new empirical attitude. He was not prepared to
                           accept or reject the Ptolemaic or Copernican theories on the basis of classical or
                           religious authority and entered the astronomical debates only after he had devel-
                           oped the telescope and made what he believed to be crucial observations in support
                           of the Copernican theory. Although earlier investigators anticipated him in both
                           theory and practice, none matched his ability to integrate and propagate those
                           elements that have since come to be treated as constitutive of modern science.




gre58624_ch04.indd   108                                                                                        12/14/07   2:55:26 PM
                                                                                          THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION   109


                   Galileo was appointed professor of mathematics at the University of Pisa at the
              age of 25. He served as professor of mathematics at the University of Padua from
              1592 until 1610, when he became mathematician-in-residence to the Grand Duke
              of Tuscany. He made important contributions to astronomy and physics, subjecting
              entrenched Aristotelian theories to critical empirical scrutiny. He continued his sci-
              entific work right up to his death in 1642, albeit in secret, since his later years were
              spent under house arrest imposed by the Inquisition. His last work, Dialogue Con-
              cerning Two New Sciences (1638/1974), was smuggled out of Italy for publication.
                   Galileo was committed to the empirical evaluation of scientific theories and
              the development of instruments that enable and facilitate the testing of scien-
              tific theories. He constructed his first telescope in 1609 to test the Copernican
              theory. He also took a critical empirical look at Aristotle’s theory of falling bodies,
              according to which bodies of different weight fall with different velocities. He
              demonstrated that bodies of different weight, such as a 100-pound cannon ball
              and 1-pound musket ball, fall with approximately the same velocity (according
              to legend, by dropping them off the Leaning Tower of Pisa). Using an improved
              water clock and a gently sloping inclined wooden plane down which he released
              polished bronze balls, Galileo developed and tested his own theory of falling bod-
              ies. This led him to recognize that forces act on bodies not to produce motion, as
              Aristotle had argued, but to change it, or produce acceleration.
                   Galileo not only rejected particular Aristotelian theories, but also the general
              form of Aristotelian explanation in physics. He renounced all attempts to explain
              the motion of bodies in terms of Aristotelian final causes, in terms of their pro-
              pensity to move toward their “natural resting place,” and employed only efficient
              causal explanations of matter in motion. This latter type of explanation, in terms
              of antecedent conditions sufficient to produce an effect, came to be characterized
              as mechanistic explanation and became associated with the popular 17th-century
              conception of the universe as a giant (usually clockwork) mechanism, governed
              by fixed laws of nature.
                   Galileo also insisted that the business of science is to explain quantitative and
              not merely qualitative changes and to do so by reference to quantitative changes in
              fundamental variables such as time, space, and motion, which led him to declare
              that mathematics is the language of science:

                     Philosophy is written in this grand book, the universe, which stands continually open
                     to our gaze. But the book cannot be understood unless one first learns to comprehend
                     the language and read the letters in which it is composed. It is written in the language
                     of mathematics.
                                                                                —(1623/1957, pp. 237–238)


                  Galileo also reprised the ancient distinction between primary and secondary
              qualities. He maintained that primary qualities, such as size, shape, and motion,




gre58624_ch04.indd    109                                                                                             12/14/07   2:55:26 PM
          110 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           are real properties of material bodies and explain how bodies affect our senses.
                           Secondary qualities, such as colors, tastes, and smells, are nothing more than the
                           manner in which material bodies affect our senses:

                               Hence I think that tastes, odors, colors and so on are no more than mere names so far
                               as the object in which we place them is concerned, and that they reside only in the
                               consciousness. Hence if the living creature were removed, all those qualities would be
                               wiped away and annihilated.
                                                                                                 —(1623/1957, p. 274)

                                Galileo explained differences in secondary qualities, such as tastes and smells,
                           in terms of differences in primary qualities, such as the shapes, sizes, and velocities
                           of microscopic particles:

                               There are bodies which constantly dissolve into minute particles, some of which are
                               heavier than air and descend, while others are lighter and rise up. The former may
                               strike upon a certain part of our bodies that is much more sensitive than the skin,
                               which does not feel the invasion of such subtle matter. This is the upper surface of
                               the tongue; here the tiny particles are received, and mixing with and penetrating its
                               moisture, they give rise to tastes, which are sweet or unsavory according to the vari-
                               ous shapes, numbers and speeds of the particles.
                                                                                                 —(1623/1957, p. 276)

                                Galileo’s new science represented an integration of the ancient natural-
                           ist (Ionian) and mathematical (Pythagorean) traditions. It also marked a new
                           beginning, by combining these traditions with a new emphasis on empirical and
                           experimental evaluation and the rejection of final causal explanation in favor of
                           efficient causal or mechanistic explanation. These paradigmatic elements are also
                           to be found in the work of the major scientists of the scientific revolution, such
                           as Robert Boyle (1627–1691), Descartes, William Gilbert (1544–1603), William
                           Harvey (1578–1657), Robert Hooke (1635–1703), Kepler, and Newton.
                                In these important respects, the work of such theorists was discontinuous with
                           the work of most ancient and medieval theorists and marked a decisive break with
                           the prior historical tradition. However, the scientific revolution was neither as
                           sudden nor as revolutionary as its name might suggest. As noted earlier, anticipa-
                           tions of the new science can be found in the writings of scholastics such as Robert
                           Grosseteste, Roger Bacon, and William of Occam; and empirical research played
                           a significant role in the work of Aristotle, Alcmaeon, Hippocrates, and Galen.
                           Although Galileo made much of his own break with the Aristotelian tradition, by
                           his own day that tradition had become pretty eclectic. The doctrines that form
                           the basis of Galileo’s Assayer, for example, are to be found in his notes from his
                           Aristotelian teachers at the Jesuit Collegío Romano (Wallace, 1984).




gre58624_ch04.indd   110                                                                                                12/14/07   2:55:27 PM
                                                                                            THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION        111


                  However, the rejection of classical orthodoxy came to play a major role in
              the rhetoric of the new science. Post-Galilean thinkers came to see themselves as
              making a new scientific beginning by breaking with tradition, rejecting ancient
              and medieval theories precisely because they were not empirically grounded.
              Thus, to take but one of many examples, Descartes felt obliged to preface his
              study of physiological psychology in The Passions of the Soul (1649) with the fol-
              lowing remarks:

                     The defects of the sciences we have from the ancients are nowhere more apparent
                     than in their writings on the passions. . . . The teachings of the ancients about the
                     passions are so meagre and for the most part so implausible that I cannot hope to
                     approach the truth except by departing from the paths they have followed. This is
                     why I shall be obliged to write just as if I were considering a topic that no one had
                     dealt with before me.
                                        —(1649/1985, p. 328)




              Andreas Vesalius and the Scientiﬁc
              Revolution in Medicine

              Galileo did not reject Aristotle’s astro-
              nomical and physical theories out of
              hand, but only when they failed to survive
              empirical evaluation. Similarly, Andreas
              Vesalius (1514–1564) subjected the clas-
              sical medical theories of Galen to empiri-
              cal evaluation and found them wanting.
              A native of Belgium, Vesalius came from
              a line of royal physicians. He studied at
              the universities of Louvain and Paris and
              was appointed professor of surgery and
              anatomy at the University of Padua.
                   The dissection of cadavers had
              become commonplace in medical teach-
              ing by the time Vesalius took up his
              professorship. However, a butcher or
              barber would usually conduct the dis-
              sections. They would cut portions from
              a cadaver for a demonstrator to display
              to students, while the lecturer read from          Vesalius: dissection; cover plate of On the Fabric of the Human
              Latin translations of Galen or Avicenna.           Body (1543).




gre58624_ch04.indd    111                                                                                                    12/14/07   2:55:27 PM
          112 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           Vesalius performed his own dissections and demonstrations and quickly identified
                           many errors in Galen, which led him to conclude that much of Galen’s system was
                           based upon the physiology of pigs and goats rather than that of humans.
                               In 1543 Vesalius published his revolutionary On the Structure of the Human Body,
                           which contained detailed descriptions and illustrations of the bones, muscles, veins,
                           arteries, viscera, and brain of the human body. Although his challenges to Galen
                           generated the same reactionary response as Galileo’s challenges to Aristotle, his pio-
                           neering studies transformed medical theory and practice. He abandoned his own
                           research in 1544 when he was appointed court physician to the Emperor Charles
                           V, but his work was continued by his student Realdo Columbus (c. 1516–1559),
                           who made important contributions to the study of circulation and respiration, and
                           by later generations of anatomists such as Giovanni Battista Morgagni of Padua
                           (1682–1771), Hermann Boerhaave (1668–1738), Joseph Lieutaud (1703–1780), and
                           William Hunter (1718–1783).

                           Francis Bacon and the Inductive Method

                           One of the most articulate advocates of the new science was the Englishman
                           Francis Bacon (1561–1626), who titled his major work on scientific method the
                           New Organon, or “new method,” (1620/1994), in explicit contrast to the Aristo-
                           telian corpus, which had come to be known as the Organon. Bacon was educated
                           at the University of Cambridge, which he entered at age 13, and was admitted
                           to the bar after studying at Gray’s Inn. Although his attempts to obtain a high
                           government position were thwarted (or at least ignored) by Queen Elizabeth I,
                           his star rose (at least temporarily) when James I gained the throne in 1603. Bacon
                           acquired various titles, including a knighthood, and high government office; he
                           was appointed Attorney General in 1613 and Lord Chancellor in 1618. In 1621
                           he was publicly disgraced and imprisoned for having accepted bribes during his
                           tenure as Lord Chancellor. In his defense, Bacon claimed that although he had
                           taken bribes, he had not allowed them to influence his judgment. He spent his
                           last years in seclusion and died as a consequence of one of his own experiments.
                           He caught a cold while stuffing a chicken with snow in order to assess its utility
                           as a preservative.
                                Bacon was a harsh critic of ancient and medieval natural philosophy and an
                           optimistic and spirited promoter of the new science. He argued that the vener-
                           ation of the ancients and the contemplative ideals of scholastic thought were
                           major obstacles to the progress of scientific knowledge. He recommended a more
                           active and critical approach, in which “vexed nature” was interrogated through
                           experimental intervention. He maintained that a true science of nature should be
                           grounded in mechanical crafts such as alchemy rather than scholastic contempla-
                           tion and reflection (although he was also critical of many alchemical practices,
                           and practitioners such as Paracelsus).




gre58624_ch04.indd   112                                                                                        12/14/07   2:55:28 PM
                                                                                           THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION   113


                   Bacon was a committed realist and materialist, who believed that the “secrets
              of nature” could be revealed through observation and experiment. He was dis-
              missive of Renaissance skepticism, which he thought could be overcome by the
              employment of a proper method for revealing the “subtlety of Nature.” He fol-
              lowed Galileo in maintaining that final causality has no place in the explanation of
              the motion of physical bodies, although, like many other 16th- and 17th-century
              scientists (including Galileo), he acknowledged that final causal explanations are
              legitimate in their appropriate psychological domain:

                     The final cause, so far from assisting the sciences, actually corrupts them, except for
                     those concerned with human actions.
                                                                                        —(1620/1994, p. 134)

                  Bacon is often treated as a champion of the inductive method, who abjured
              hypothetical speculation in favor of careful and systematic observation. He did claim
              that his own method involved cautious inferential ascent from carefully established
              “natural and experimental histories” to the establishment of theoretical axioms:

                     But there will be hope for the sciences when, and only when, ascent is made by the
                     right kind of ladder, through an uninterrupted, connected series of steps, from par-
                     ticulars to lesser axioms, one above the other, and last of all to the most general.
                                                                                        —(1620/1994, p. 110)

                   However, Bacon was dismissive of the Aristotelian method of enumerative
              induction, through which general truths of nature are derived by generalization
              from the observation of positive instances of correlation (by generalizing that “All
              swans are white” on the basis of the observation of a number of white swans, for
              example). He insisted that true natural science should be based upon eliminative
              induction, in which causal conditions are identified via the falsification of alterna-
              tive causal hypotheses:

                     For induction that proceeds through simple enumeration is childish, its conclusions
                     are precarious, and open to danger from a contradicting instance, and it generally
                     makes its pronouncement on too few things, and on those only that are ready to
                     hand. But induction that will be of use for the discovery and demonstration of the
                     arts and sciences must analyse Nature by proper rejections and exclusions, and then,
                     after a number of negatives, come to a conclusion on the affirmative instances.
                                                                                        —(1620/1994, p. 111)

                   Bacon did not advocate a narrow empiricist science restricted to observational
              correlation. He was well aware of the need for creative invention in the formu-
              lation of hypotheses and championed the role of novel prediction in empirical




gre58624_ch04.indd    113                                                                                              12/14/07   2:55:28 PM
          114 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           evaluation. He claimed that hypotheses should be evaluated by their utility in
                           “discovering new works”: “axioms properly and methodologically applied can
                           very well point to and indicate new particulars” (1620/1994, p. 50). He recog-
                           nized that different hypotheses can provide formally adequate explanations of
                           the same empirical data (as demonstrated by the Copernican debates) and rec-
                           ommended that such conflicts between hypotheses be adjudicated by a crucial
                           instance (1620/1994, p. 210): a prediction affirmed by one hypothesis but denied
                           by the other (such as the different predictions about whether light accelerates or
                           decelerates in moving from a less dense to a denser medium offered by the particle
                           and wave theories of light). Bacon characterized such a prediction as an Instance
                           of the Fingerpost, which serves as a “pointer” to the correct theory (in England,
                           signposts at rural crossroads often have wooden fingers pointing in the direction
                           of nearby villages).
                               Bacon was opposed to the Aristotelian rational intuition of causal principles
                           and essential forms, of proceeding directly to very general theories or axioms:

                               The understanding must not be allowed to leap and fly from particulars to remote and
                               nearly the most general axioms . . . and from their [supposed] unshakeable truth, to
                               prove and deliver intermediate axioms.
                                                                                               —(1620/1994, p. 110)

                           However, as Newton was shortly to demonstrate with his theory of gravitation, a
                           speculative “leap” to very general principles could also be enormously productive.
                               Nevertheless, Bacon’s account of inductive ascent from observations to
                           increasingly general hypotheses and theories does describe the practice of many
                           of the contributors to the scientific revolution. Robert Hooke and Robert Boyle
                           derived their laws of elasticity and gas expansion from tables of correlation, and
                           the works of William Gilbert on magnetism (On Magnetism, 1600/1958), William
                           Harvey on the circulation of the blood (On the Circulation of the Blood, 1628/1989)
                           and Isaac Newton on optics (Opticks, 1704/1952) include many careful descrip-
                           tions of observed effects and tentative empirical laws, followed by conclusions
                           that develop cautious speculative theories to integrate and explain these tenta-
                           tive laws.
                               Bacon was one of the first theorists to stress that scientific knowledge enables
                           scientists to predict and control the natural world, or establish “dominion over
                           nature.” He famously claimed that

                               Human knowledge and human power come to the same thing, for where the cause
                               is not known the effect cannot be produced. We can only command Nature by
                               obeying her, and what in contemplation represents the cause, in operation stands as
                               the rule.
                                                                                                —(1620/1994, p. 43)




gre58624_ch04.indd   114                                                                                              12/14/07   2:55:28 PM
                                                                                        THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION     115


              He was greatly impressed by the technological potential of scientific discoveries,
              citing the recent inventions of printing, gunpowder, and the compass:

                     It is worth noticing the great power and value and consequences of discoveries,
                     in none more obvious than those three which were unknown to the ancients . . .
                     namely, the arts of printing, gunpowder, and the compass. For these three have
                     changed the whole face and condition of things throughout the world, in literature,
                     in warfare and in navigation.
                                                                               —(1620/1994, pp. 130–131)

              In claiming that scientific theories should be judged by the success of their “works,”
              Bacon also stressed their contribution to the human condition. In the New Atlantis
              (1627/1966), he envisioned a developed inductive science capable of relieving
              human pain, curing disease, and extending the life span.
                   Like many other advocates of the new sci-
              ence, Bacon recommended that practitioners
              should abandon the theories of the ancients
              and medievals and begin anew:

                     We can look in vain for advancement in
                     scientific knowledge from the superinducing
                     and grafting of new things on old. A fresh
                     start must be made, beginning from the very
                     foundations.
                                               —(1620/1954, p. 51)

              In representing the new science as setting the
              course for new scientific discoveries, Bacon
              likened himself to Columbus setting out to
              discover the Americas:

                     And so my conjectures, which make what
                     is hoped for probable, are set out and made
                     known; just as Columbus did, before his won-
                     derful voyage across the Atlantic Ocean.
                                             —(1620/1954, p. 103)


              The frontispiece of the New Organon depicted
              a ship setting out on uncharted waters.

              Social Dimensions of Science Bacon was one              Frontispiece of Francis Bacon’s Novum Organum (1620).
              of the earliest practitioners of the psychology         Ship of Knowledge setting out on uncharted waters.




gre58624_ch04.indd    115                                                                                              12/14/07   2:55:29 PM
          116 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           and sociology of science and documented a variety of cognitive deficits and social
                           biases, which he called “idols which beset men’s minds.” He argued that the
                           method of inductive ascent was the best means of surmounting these cognitive
                           and social dimensions of human nature.
                                Bacon characterized as Idols of the tribe those innate human propensities
                           to project a greater degree of regularity in nature than can actually be found,
                           to presume that the “subtleties” of nature can be understood through familiar
                           analogies, and to adhere to favored theories in the face of empirical falsification.
                           The net result of such cognitive deficits was what Bacon called “wishful science.”
                           Bacon characterized as Idols of the cave those idiosyncratic products of individ-
                           ual human development that incline some men to fixate on novelty and others to
                           overproject similarity or difference in nature. He cautioned scientists to be espe-
                           cially suspicious of any theoretical notion about which they were individually
                           enthusiastic.
                                Bacon characterized as Idols of the marketplace those notions derived from
                           common linguistic usage employed in the theoretical description of nature that
                           impede the development of proper scientific terminology. He characterized as
                           Idols of the theatre those theoretical systems that are socially maintained by the
                           various schools of philosophy as received dogma (such as the Ptolemaic theory)
                           and form the bases of most forms of education.
                                Although he identified some of the social dimensions of human nature that
                           bias scientific thought, Bacon was also a forceful advocate of the social commu-
                           nity of science. He recognized the benefits for scientific communication derived
                           from the invention of printing and those that could be accrued through the social
                           cooperation of scientists. In the New Atlantis (1627/1966) he envisioned a future
                           society of scientists and technologists devoted to knowledge and discovery and
                           petitioned King James I to finance the creation of cooperative research projects.
                           Although personally unsuccessful in securing this goal in his own lifetime, the
                           “Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge” was founded in
                           London by Charles II in 1662 and implemented both Bacon’s general vision and a
                           number of his specific research projects.
                                Similar societies were founded in Europe at around the same time. The
                           Academia del Cimento (Academy of Experiments) was founded in Florence in 1657,
                           the Académie des Sciences in Paris in 1666, the Berlin Academy in 1700, and the
                           St. Petersburg Academy in 1724 (Pyenson & Sheets-Pyenson, 1999). One conse-
                           quence of the formation of these scientific societies was the development of the logic
                           and practice of what came to be known as the experimental report. In the early meet-
                           ings of the Royal Society, when the numbers were relatively small, members used to
                           demonstrate their “effects” in front of their colleagues. When time constraints and
                           the rapidly increasing membership made it impractical for most members to do so,
                           they developed a convention that members should report their results by writing
                           a “recipe” that would enable any other member to reproduce their effects. In this




gre58624_ch04.indd   116                                                                                        12/14/07   2:55:29 PM
                                                                                 THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION   117


              fashion the logic of experimental replication was born. These “recipes” were col-
              lected annually and published as the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
              (Bazerman, 1988). Experimental reports in psychology, with their methods, design,
              and procedure sections, are direct descendants of these “recipes.”
                   Philosophical Transactions, first published in 1665, became the model for later
              scientific journals, such as the German Miscellanea Curiosa, first published in 1670,
              and the French Histoires et Mémoires, first published in 1702. International scien-
              tific communication was also greatly enhanced by the emergence of scientific
              correspondents; these initial efforts developed into the institution of correspond-
              ing members of scientific societies. Henry Oldenburg (c. 1618–1647), the first
              secretary of the Royal Society, maintained an extensive correspondence network
              with members of the European scientific community, as did Marin Mersenne
              (1588–1648) in Paris.



              The Newtonian Synthesis

              In the conclusion of On Magnetism (1600/1958), William Gilbert had speculated
              that the planets are held in their orbits (and their matter held in cohesion)
              by a force analogous if not identical to magnetism. Isaac Newton (1642–1727)
              developed this speculation into the theory of universal gravitation. Born in
              Lincolnshire, Newton was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he
              received his degree in 1665. In the two years following, he secluded himself in
              Lincolnshire to avoid the plague. This was perhaps Newton’s most creative period:
              He developed the binomial theorem, invented the “method of fluxions” (calculus),
              and created the first reflecting telescope. It was also during this period that
              Newton first began to develop his theory of universal gravitation. He was appointed
              professor of mathematics at Cambridge in 1669. He became a fellow of the Royal
              Society in 1672 and was elected president in 1703. He published Mathematical
              Principles of Natural Philosophy (Principia) in 1687 and Opticks in 1704.
                    In 1696 Newton was appointed warden of the Royal Mint, in order that he
              might apply his mathematical talents to the reformation of the currency—although
              Voltaire maintained that he was appointed because the Treasurer, Lord Halifax,
              was besotted with Newton’s niece. Throughout his life Newton engaged in run-
              ning feuds with Robert Hooke and Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716) over credit for
              the initial development of the “rectilinear inertial principle” and calculus. With
              respect to the development of calculus, an investigative committee of the Royal
              Society found in favor of Newton, but this was scarcely surprising, since Newton,
              in his capacity as president of the society, appointed the committee and authored
              its final report.
                    Newton’s theory of universal gravitation was held to be a triumph of mecha-
              nistic explanation, since it integrated the laws of terrestrial and celestial motion




gre58624_ch04.indd   117                                                                                     12/14/07   2:55:29 PM
          118 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           propounded by Galileo and Kepler (or at least approximations of them) and
                           successfully explained a wide range of empirical data, such as the motion of the
                           tides and centrifugal motion. Newton also followed Galileo in assuming that
                           quantified mechanistic laws could be extended to the atomistic components of
                           material bodies, or corpuscles as Robert Boyle called them, and developed his own
                           corpuscularian theory of light in Opticks (1704/1952), in which he treated light
                           as a stream of material corpuscles. The triumph of the new mechanistic and math-
                           ematical science, based upon quantified efficient causal explanations of matter in
                           motion, appeared complete.
                                Yet not everyone rushed to embrace Newton’s gravitational theory, at least
                           initially. It took almost 80 years for Newton’s theory to displace Descartes’ rival
                           vortex theory on the continent of Europe. One of the advantages of Descartes’
                           theory was that it explained why all the planetary orbits are in the same direction,
                           which Newton’s theory did not. However, Newton’s theory eventually came to
                           establish its supremacy, and deservedly so, since later Newtonians transformed
                           what initially appeared to be empirical anomalies into substantive developments
                           of Newtonian theory. For example, U. J. J. Leverrier (1811–1877) accommodated
                           the initial failure of Newton’s theory to correctly predict the orbit of Uranus by
                           postulating another planet beyond Uranus, which led to the discovery of the
                           planet Neptune.
                                Newton, who was a great admirer of Bacon, avowed that he had followed the
                           method of inductive ascent in the development of his theories:

                               Particular propositions are inferred from the phenomena, and afterwards rendered
                               general by induction. Thus it was that the impenetrability, the mobility, and the
                               impulsive force of bodies, and the laws of motion and gravitation, were discovered.
                                                                                                —(1687/1969, p. 547)


                           Yet this was patently not the case with respect to the development of Newton’s laws
                           of motion, which involved the direct postulation of very abstract axioms. Newton’s
                           first law of motion states, “Every body continues in a state of rest, or of uniform
                           motion in a right line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed
                           upon it.” Since no body actually moves in a right line, because every body is sub-
                           jected to external forces, this cannot be established by induction (Losee, 1980).



                           MAN THE MACHINE

                           The mechanistic forms of efficient causal explanation that displaced teleological
                           or final causal explanation in astronomy and physics were eventually extended to
                           biology and psychology. One of the first and most influential mechanistic expla-
                           nations of a biological process was William Harvey’s account of the circulation




gre58624_ch04.indd   118                                                                                               12/14/07   2:55:30 PM
                                                                                             MAN THE MACHINE   119


              of the blood (1628/1989), in which he claimed that the veins and arteries form
              closed loops through which the heart pumps blood.
                   The Spanish physician Gómez Pereira (1500–c.1559) extended mechanis-
              tic explanation to the whole human body. Pereira studied at the University of
              Salamanca, where he became acquainted with the work of the Merton mathemati-
              cians, notably Richard Swineshead’s text on motion, Liber Calculationum (Bandrés
              & Llavona, 1992). In Antoniana Margarita (1554), Pereira employed Swineshead’s
              theoretical system to explain the “vital” functions of animals in purely mecha-
              nistic terms. He explained all forms of animal behavior in terms of instincts and
              learned habits, without any reference to consciousness or reason, which he denied
              animals possessed. He provided a detailed account of reflexive behavior, in which
              he described how mechanical activation in sensory organs is transmitted by the
              nerves to the brain, which in turn activates nerves that produce mechanical move-
              ments in muscles. Pereira’s account anticipated the theory of reflexive behavior
              later developed by Descartes.

              René Descartes: Mind and Mechanism

              René Descartes was born in La Haye, France, in 1596, and educated at the Jesuit
              College at La Flèche. He attained a degree in law from the University of Poitiers, but
              did not practice, since his share of the family fortune furnished him with independ-
              ent financial means. He enlisted privately in the Dutch army in 1618 and, while serv-
              ing at Ulm, had a dream “in a stove-heated room” that stimulated his interest in sci-
              ence and methodology. He traveled widely in Europe, returning to take up residence
              in Holland in 1628. During the next 20 years he changed his residence as many
              times, his whereabouts known only to his close friend in Paris, Marin Mersenne,
              with whom he corresponded but rarely saw. The reasons for his voluntary solitude
              are unclear, since few details of his private life are known. He never married, although
              he did have an illegitimate daughter, Francine, who died at the age of 5 in 1640.
                   Between 1629 and 1633 Descartes produced his major work on physics and
              mathematics, The World, but suppressed its publication when he heard of Galileo’s
              troubles with the Inquisition. To no avail, as it turned out: Descartes’ works were
              placed on the Catholic Index of Prohibited Books, as was The World when it was
              published posthumously in 1664. In this work Descartes presented his vortex the-
              ory of celestial motion, which dominated continental Europe in the late 17th and
              early 18th century, until it was eventually displaced by Newton’s gravitational
              theory. Descartes introduced analytic geometry, with its system of what are now
              known as Cartesian coordinates, in Discourse on Method in 1637. His other major
              works on knowledge and the relation between mind and body were Meditations on
              First Philosophy (1641) and The Passions of the Soul (1649).
                   In 1649 Queen Kristina of Sweden (1626–1689) invited the now famous
              Descartes to be her personal philosopher in residence. He accepted, but it




gre58624_ch04.indd   119                                                                                       12/14/07   2:55:30 PM
          120 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           proved to be a fatal error. The philosopher who had developed many of his
                           ideas in his bed (he created analytic geometry by meditating on a means of
                           plotting the position of a fly on the roof above his bed) did not take kindly to
                           Queen Kristina’s tutorial schedule, which began at five in the morning, or the
                           severe Swedish winter. He died of pneumonia within six months and was buried
                           in a Swedish cemetery. His last words are reputed to have been “So, my soul, it
                           is time to part.”
                                Insult followed injury. In 1666 the French resolved to have Descartes’ remains
                           returned to his native land. The French ambassador to Sweden arranged to have
                           the body exhumed and returned to France in a special copper coffin constructed
                           for this purpose, but on exhumation it was discovered that the coffin was too
                           short. The ambassador ordered that the head be severed from the body, to be
                           returned to France separately. The body was shipped back to Paris, where it was
                           buried in the church of Sainte-Genevieve-du-Mont, minus the right forefinger,
                           which the ambassador had cut off as a souvenir. Unfortunately, the head did not
                           make it back as quickly. It was purloined by a Swedish army captain and changed
                           hands many times among private collectors of exotica before being returned to
                           Paris in 1806. For many years it was shelved in the Musée de l’Homme, part of
                           the National Academy of Sciences, where it remained until very recently (Boakes,
                           1984). The present curator was not happy that the head was being displayed
                           among a collection of criminals and primitives and removed it from the shelf.




                                   Descartes’ skull.




gre58624_ch04.indd   120                                                                                     12/14/07   2:55:30 PM
                                                                                                              MAN THE MACHINE   121


              According to the last report,1 it is now housed in a drawer of one of his filing
              cabinets!

              Descartes’ Science Like Bacon, Descartes aimed to reconstruct human knowledge
              and dismissed the “shaky foundations” upon which the ancient and medieval
              tradition was based. He resolved

                     never to accept anything as true if I did not have evident knowledge of its truth . . .
                     to avoid precipitous conclusions and preconceptions, and to include nothing more in
                     my judgments than what is presented to my mind so clearly and so distinctly that I
                     had no occasion to doubt it.
                                                                                                —(1637/1985, p. 120)


              Although he ended up affirming many doctrines that were congenial to the Catho-
              lic Church, such as the existence of God and the immortality of the soul, Descartes
              insisted that any form of knowledge worth its name ought to be independently
              demonstrable through reason or empirical evidence.
                   Also like Bacon, Descartes affirmed the potential of the new mechanistic
              science to extend the power of humans over nature and to improve the human
              condition, in contrast to the contemplative natural philosophy of the scholas-
              tics. As he put it, the new science “opened my eyes to the possibility of gaining
              knowledge which would be very useful in life, and of discovering a practical
              philosophy which might replace the speculative philosophy taught in the
              schools”:

                     Through this philosophy we could know the power and action of fire, water, air, the
                     stars, the heavens and all the other bodies in the environment . . . and we could use
                     this knowledge . . . for all the purposes for which it is appropriate, and thus make
                     ourselves, as it were, the lords and masters of nature. This is desirable not only for the
                     invention of innumerable devices which would facilitate our enjoyment of the fruits
                     of the earth and all the goods we find there, but also, more importantly, for the main-
                     tenance of health, which is undoubtedly the chief good and the foundation of all the
                     other goods in this life.
                                                                                        —(1637/1985, pp. 142–143)


                   Like Galileo, Descartes was committed to the primary and secondary quality
              distinction and abjured final causal explanation in physics. Indeed, in one fun-
              damental respect his physics represented more of a paradigm of mechanistic
              explanation than Newton’s physics, since Descartes conceived of motion as the


              1I owe this piece of information to a former graduate student, Mark Sheehan, who visited the Musée de

              l’Homme to view Descartes’ skull.




gre58624_ch04.indd    121                                                                                                       12/14/07   2:55:31 PM
          122 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           rearrangement of bodies in space. According to Descartes’ vortex theory, planets
                           are held in their orbits by swirling vortices of “subtle matter,” analogous to the
                           motion of corks caught up in a whirlpool. Many held that such explanations in
                           terms of “action-by-contact” were superior to explanations in terms of “action-at-
                           a-distance,” such as explanations postulating “occult” forces of gravitational or
                           magnetic attraction, which seemed as dubious as Aristotelian final causal explana-
                           tions in terms of bodies trying to reach their natural resting place.
                                In contrast to Bacon and Galileo, Descartes was a rationalist. He claimed that
                           knowledge of the fundamental nature of material bodies could be attained only by
                           rational intuition, since it is not given to us in the flux of sense experience. Thus
                           Descartes maintained that some general theoretical principles are known a priori,
                           independently of sense experience. For example, in his discussion of the melting
                           of a piece of wax in the Meditations (1641/1985), he argued that we determine that
                           extension (in space) is the essential property of material bodies through rational
                           intuition rather than by sense experience, since we recognize that it is the only
                           property that remains constant throughout changes in the perceived taste, smell,
                           color, shape, and size of the wax (1641/1985, p. 20–21).
                                Descartes also claimed that very general principles of physics, such as “all
                           motion is caused by impact or pressure” and “all bodies at rest remain at rest,
                           and bodies in motion remain in motion, unless acted upon by some other body”
                           (Newton’s first law), could be rationally intuited, or deduced from rationally intu-
                           ited principles (Buchdahl, 1969). He maintained that we have innate ideas and
                           knowledge: that our ideas of God, infinity, and perfection, and our knowledge
                           of the axioms of geometry and logic are so “clear and distinct” that they must
                           be accepted as true, even though they may have no counterparts in our sense
                           experience.
                                Descartes’ ideal of knowledge was a deductive structure with rationally intu-
                           ited axioms at its apex. His goal was to identify axioms, or “first principles,”
                           that were so certain that they were immune from error or doubt. Although he
                           rejected Bacon’s claim that such axioms must be established via inductive ascent,
                           Descartes recognized that lower-level principles and laws have to be established by
                           observation and experiment. For Descartes, rationally induced general laws place
                           constraints on our theories of the motion of material bodies, but the particular
                           content of laws governing their motion has to be empirically determined (Clark,
                           1982). Descartes’ own work in optics and biology was based upon observation
                           and experiment, and in the last chapter of Discourse on Method he acknowledged
                           that competing scientific explanations can be adjudicated only by critical observa-
                           tions, or what Bacon called crucial instances:

                               I know of no other means to discover this than by seeking further observations whose
                               outcomes vary according to which of the ways provide the correct explanation.
                                                                                              —(1637/1985, p. 144)




gre58624_ch04.indd   122                                                                                              12/14/07   2:55:31 PM
                                                                                                      MAN THE MACHINE   123


              Animal Automatism One of Descartes’ most significant contributions to the
              history of science and psychology was his application of the mechanistic principles
              of efficient causal explanation to the behavior of organic beings. In his Treatise
              on Man (the second part of The World), he advanced mechanistic explanations
              (in terms of matter in motion) of the biological and psychological functions of
              animals and humans. He maintained that

                     the digestion of food, the beating of the heart and arteries, the nourishment and
                     growth of the limbs, respiration, waking and sleeping, the reception by the exter-
                     nal sense organs of light, sounds, smells, tastes, heat and other such qualities, the
                     imprinting of the ideas of these qualities in the organ of the “common” sense and
                     the imagination, the retention or stamping of these ideas in the memory, the internal
                     movements of the appetites and passions, and finally the external movement of all
                     the limbs . . . follow from the mere arrangement of the machine’s organs every bit as
                     naturally as the movements of a clock or other automaton [moving machine] follow
                     from the arrangement of its counter-weights and wheels.
                                                                                         —(1664/1985, p. 108)

                  One of Descartes’ best known contributions in this area was his detailed
              description of reflexive behavior. Although Galen had identified simple reflexes
              such as the pupillary reflex, Descartes was the first to provide a detailed physi-
              ological account of reflexive behavior, which he characterized as automatic and
              involuntary:

                     If someone suddenly thrusts his hand in front of our eyes as if to strike us, then
                     even if we know he is our friend, that he is doing this only in fun, and that he will
                     take care not to harm us, we still find it difficult to prevent ourselves from clos-
                     ing our eyes. This shows that it is not through the mediation of our soul that they
                     close, since this action is contrary to our volition, which is the only, or at least the
                     principle, activity of the soul. They close rather because the mechanism of our body
                     is so composed that the movement of the hand towards our eyes produces another
                     movement in our brain, which directs the animal spirits into our muscles that make
                     our eyelids drop.
                                                                                  —(1649/1985, pp. 333–334)

              Descartes called such behavior reflexive because he believed that in the case of
              automatic and involuntary behavior, animal spirits are “reflected” in the brain in
              the fashion that light is reflected on the surface of a liquid (Boakes, 1984).
                  Descartes claimed that sensory organs are connected to pores in the brain
              via a system of “delicate threads” within the nerves and that the pores in the
              brain are capable of directing animal spirits though the nerves to the muscles. In
              the case of a person who withdraws a foot when it comes into contact with fire,




gre58624_ch04.indd    123                                                                                               12/14/07   2:55:32 PM
          124 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                                                                         Descartes supposed that the moving par-
                                                                         ticles of the fire interact with receptors in
                                                                         the foot, which pull on the nerve threads
                                                                         connected to the pores of the brain. This
                                                                         action in turn causes the release of animal
                                                                         spirits, which flow through the nerves to
                                                                         the muscles of the foot, causing it to be
                                                                         withdrawn from the fire:

                                                                               Next, to understand how the external
                                                                               objects which strike the sense organs
                                                                               can prompt this machine to move its
                                                                               limbs in numerous different ways, you
                                                                               should consider that the tiny fibres
                                                                               (which, as I have already told you,
                                                                               come from the innermost region of its
                                                                               brain and compose the marrow of the
                                                                               nerves) are so arranged in each part of
                                                                               the machine that serves as the organ
                                                                               of some sense that they can be easily
                                                                               moved by the objects of that sense.
          Man reﬂexively withdrawing foot from ﬁre, illustrating nerve         And when they are moved, with how-
          pathway to brain. From Descartes: Treatise on Man (1664).            ever little force, they simultaneously
                                                                               pull the parts of the brain from which
                               they come, and thereby open the entrances to certain pores in the internal surface
                               of the brain. Through these pores the animal spirits in the cavities of the brain
                               immediately begin to make their way back into the nerves and so to the muscles
                               which serve to cause movements in the machine.
                                                                                                  —(1664/1985, p. 101)

                               Descartes claimed that this mechanistic reflexive form of explanation could be
                           extended to all animal and much of human behavior and suggested that

                               This will not seem at all strange to those who know how many kinds of automatons,
                               or moving machines, the skill of man can construct with the use of very few parts, in
                               comparison with the great multitude of bones, muscles, nerves, arteries, veins, and
                               all the other parts that are in the body of any animal. For they will regard this body
                               as a machine which, having been made by the hands of God, is incomparably better
                               ordered than any machine that can be devised by man, and contains in itself move-
                               ments more wonderful than those in any such machine.
                                                                                                  —(1637/1985, p. 139)




gre58624_ch04.indd   124                                                                                                 12/14/07   2:55:32 PM
                                                                                          MAN THE MACHINE   125


                   Descartes’ conception of the living body as an automaton or “moving machine”
              may have been inspired by the mechanical statues found in the royal gardens of
              his day, such as those in the chateau of Saint-Germain-en-Laye outside Paris (which
              Descartes may have visited), powered by water and triggered by mechanical plates
              embedded in footpaths. The general form of Descartes’ account did not mark much
              of an advance over the medieval theory of the inner senses. He retained Aristotle’s
              common sense and Galen’s “animal spirits,” and many of the details of his account
              were empirically falsified within his own lifetime. However, Descartes’ account
              was revolutionary because he applied mechanistic reflexive explanation not only
              to innate reflexes such as the pupillary reflex and involuntary behavior such as
              digestion, yawning, and sleeping, but also to many forms of animal and human
              behavior based upon learning and memory: “movements which are so appropriate
              not only to the actions of objects presented to our senses, but also to the passions
              and the impressions found in memory” (1664/1985, p. 108). Like 20th-century
              behaviorist psychologists, he maintained that the learned behavior of animals,
              and much of the learned behavior of humans, is as automatic and involuntary as
              innate reflexes and instincts and can be explained without reference to consciousness
              or cognition. Like Gómez Pereira, Descartes held that animals lack consciousness
              and reason, which he believed justified his own practice of dissecting live animals,
              whose yelps and howls he treated as merely mechanical noises.



              Mind and Body Although Descartes believed that mechanistic reflexive forms of
              explanation could account for all animal behavior and some human behavior, he
              denied that they could account for voluntary human behavior. Descartes did not
              simply maintain, as many contemporary cognitive psychologists would maintain,
              that some human behaviors are nonreflexive because they involve some form
              of internal cognitive processing and thus require a more complex mechanistic
              explanation. Rather, he claimed that voluntary human behavior could not be
              explained mechanistically at all. According to Descartes, some human behavior is
              generated through the action of a distinct immaterial soul, whose essence is thought.
              Descartes was perhaps the most famous substance dualist and interactionist. He
              claimed that the immaterial mind, the seat of reason, consciousness, and will,
              interacts with the material body via the pineal gland in the brain, which enables
              the immaterial mind to direct the animal spirits to different muscles and generate
              different forms of behavior at will.
                   Why did Descartes hold such a view? It is easy to understand how he might
              have been motivated to do so. To extend mechanistic explanation to the human
              mind would have been to deny the existence of the immortal soul, still a danger-
              ous heresy in Descartes’ day. He was well aware of the fate of Bruno and Galileo
              and withdrew his general mechanistic work The World when he learned of Galileo’s




gre58624_ch04.indd   125                                                                                    12/14/07   2:55:33 PM
          126 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           condemnation by the Inquisition. Later critics have speculated that Descartes did
                           not really believe that human psychology is exempt from mechanistic explana-
                           tion, but only publicly advocated such a view to avoid persecution (Lafleur, 1956).
                           Julien Offroy de La Mettrie (1709–1751), who did extend the principles of mecha-
                           nistic explanation to human thought and voluntary behavior, was one of the first
                           to accuse Descartes of being a closet materialist about the mind.
                                Descartes’ primary argument for his ontological distinction between mind
                           and body was epistemological in nature and was part of his general project to set
                           knowledge upon firm and certain foundations. In reaction to ancient and Renais-
                           sance skepticism about beliefs derived from our sense experience of the world,
                           Descartes sought a “first principle” for his knowledge system that was so certain
                           that it was immune from error or doubt. He followed Augustine and Avicenna in
                           claiming that although he could doubt that he had a material body, he could not
                           doubt that he existed as a thinking being, since thinking presupposes existence
                           and doubting is a form of thinking. Consequently,

                               observing, that this truth “I am thinking, therefore I exist” was so firm and sure that
                               all the most extravagant suppositions of the skeptics were incapable of shaking it, I
                               decided that I could accept it without scruple as the first principle of the philosophy I
                               was seeking.
                                                                                                  —(1637/1985, p. 127)


                                Given that he could without contradiction or absurdity doubt the existence
                           of his body (however exaggerated this doubt might be, including the imagination
                           of an “evil demon” intent on deceiving him), but could not doubt his existence
                           as a thinking being, Descartes claimed that he could not be identical to his body,
                           since “Otherwise, if I had doubts about my body, I would also have doubts about
                           myself, and I cannot have doubts about that” (1643/1985, p. 412).
                                Whatever the merits of this argument, Descartes’ interactionist account of
                           the relation between mind and body created a serious problem. How could an
                           immaterial mind, with no physical properties or spatial location, interact with a
                           material body extended in space? This was an especially pressing problem for Des-
                           cartes, given his commitment to the efficient causal explanation of the motion of
                           material bodies in terms of action by contact and his recognition of the intimate
                           connection between mind and body, particularly in relation to the appetites and
                           emotions:


                               Nature also teaches me, by these sensations of pain, hunger, thirst and so on, that I am
                               not merely present in my body as a sailor is present in a ship, but that I am very closely
                               joined and, as it were, intermingled with it, so that I and the body form a unit.
                                                                                                   —(1641/1985, p. 56)




gre58624_ch04.indd   126                                                                                                    12/14/07   2:55:33 PM
                                                                                                   MAN THE MACHINE   127


              This problem, which had vexed Queen Kristina of Sweden, was one that Descartes
              never resolved.
                  Materialist critics such as Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655), Hobbes, and La Mettrie
              maintained that the functions of the human mind, including language and reason-
              ing, could be ascribed to the brain and extended mechanistic causal explanation
              to encompass all human thought and behavior. Other critics defended mind-body
              dualism but rejected interactionism. Arnold Geulincx (1625–1669) and Nicholas
              Malebranche (1638–1715) held that God directly causes the regular correlation
              between mental and bodily states, a view known as occasionalism, and Leibniz
              claimed that God maintains the regular correlation of mental and bodily states
              through a pre-established harmony between mental and bodily states. However,
              neither position proved popular with later dualists.


              Machine and Animal Intelligence Descartes offered arguments in support of his claim
              that mechanistic reflexive explanation could not be extended to voluntary human
              behavior that were independent of his epistemological arguments for mind-body
              dualism. He claimed that voluntary human behavior could always be distinguished
              from the behavior of animals or machines, even if such machines were physically
              modeled upon real people. These arguments are especially interesting because
              they anticipate late-20th-century debates about whether machines such as digital
              computers are capable of simulating language comprehension and problem solving.
                   According to Descartes, all machines, including animal automata, are incapa-
              ble of language. Although suitable machines could be created (and animals such as
              parrots taught) to produce appropriate noises in appropriate stimulus situations—
              for example, to utter “I am in pain” when their receptors were damaged—Descartes
              claimed that

                     it is not conceivable that such a machine should produce different arrangements of
                     words so as to give an appropriately meaningful answer to whatever is said in its pres-
                     ence, as even the dullest of men can do.
                                                                                      —(1637/1985, p. 140)


              Although he acknowledged that machines could perform some complex tasks
              better than humans (a mechanical clock can measure time better than a person
              can), Descartes claimed that no machine is capable of problem solving in the form
              of rational adaptation to novel situations:

                     Even though such machines might do some things as well as we do them, or perhaps
                     even better, they would inevitably fail in others, which would reveal that they were
                     acting not through understanding but only from the disposition of their organs.
                                                                                      —(1637/1985, p. 140)




gre58624_ch04.indd    127                                                                                            12/24/07   5:29:52 PM
          128 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                               These arguments highlight the peculiar nature of Descartes’ contribution to
                           psychology. In claiming that mechanistic explanation could be extended to the
                           realm of animal and human behavior, he emphasized the continuity of animal
                           and human behavior with other material processes in nature. In denying that
                           mechanistic reflexive explanation could be extended to human thought and vol-
                           untary behavior, he postulated a fundamental discontinuity between animals and
                           human beings.
                               Descartes believed that the extension of mechanistic explanation to human
                           thought and voluntary behavior undermined human freedom and claimed that
                           the idea that humans are no different from animals posed a serious threat to
                           morality and religion:

                               For after the errors of those who deny God . . . there is none that leads weak minds
                               further from the path of virtue than that of imagining that the souls of beasts are of
                               the same nature as ours, and hence that after this present life we have nothing to fear
                               or to hope for, any more than flies and ants.
                                                                                                  —(1637/1985, p. 141)


                               It is important to recognize that Descartes’ arguments against animal and
                           machine language and problem solving were independent of his arguments for
                           mind-body dualism. Conwy Lloyd Morgan, the comparative psychologist, and
                           John B. Watson, the behaviorist psychologist, were later materialists who also
                           maintained that only humans have the capacity for language, and the question
                           of whether machines such as digital computers are capable of genuinely creative
                           problem solving remains a lively issue for contemporary psychologists and phi-
                           losophers (Boden, 2003; Dreyfus, 1992).


                           Vitalism   Descartes extended the principles of mechanistic explanation to the
                           functions of the Aristotelian nutritive and sensitive souls, but not to those of
                           the rational soul. In so doing, he took the revolutionary step of separating the
                           principles of life and mind.
                                From the time of the ancient Greeks, the psyche had been treated as the actu-
                           alizing principle of both life and mind. By maintaining that vital processes such as
                           digestion, respiration, and sensory-motor reflexes are a product of the organized
                           matter of the body machine, Descartes denied that the rational soul or mind is
                           responsible for the life of the material body:

                               In order to explain these functions, then, it is not necessary to conceive of this machine
                               as having any vegetative or sensitive soul or other principle of movement and life.
                                                                                 —(Treatise on Man, 1664/1985, p. 108)




gre58624_ch04.indd   128                                                                                                    12/14/07   2:55:34 PM
                                                                                                    MAN THE MACHINE   129


              This was the fundamental idea behind the mechanistic conception of biological
              functions. Or, as Descartes put it,

                     And let us recognize that the difference between the body of a living man and that
                     of a dead man is just like the difference between, on the one hand, a watch or other
                     automaton (that is, a self-moving machine), when it is wound up and contains in itself
                     the corporeal principle of the movements for which it was designed, together with
                     everything else required for its operation; and on the other hand, the same watch or
                     machine when it is broken and the principle of its movement ceases to be active.
                                                                                 —(1649/1985, pp. 329–330)


                  Thus Descartes did not treat the immaterial soul as the source of the vitality
              of the material body or the departure of the immaterial soul as the cause of bodily
              death. According to Descartes, this common error likely arose from “supposing
              that since dead bodies are devoid of heat and movement, it is the absence of the
              soul which causes this cessation of movement and heat”:

                     Thus it has been believed, without justification, that our natural heat and all these
                     movements of our bodies depend upon our soul; whereas we ought to hold, on the
                     contrary, that the soul takes its leave when we die only because this heat ceases and
                     the organs which bring about bodily movement decay.
                                                                                       —(1649/1985, p. 329)


                   This account of biological functions in terms of an emergent vital force of
              organized matter stimulated a fertile tradition of physiological research, although
              it later became the object of criticism by reductive physiologists, notably in the
              19th century.

              Introspection and Images Descartes claimed that we have infallible introspective
              knowledge: that our conscious apprehension of our own mental states such
              as sensations, beliefs, emotions, thoughts, and memories is direct and certain.
              In developing his system of knowledge from first principles, Descartes argued
              that although he could doubt that sense experience provides knowledge of the
              existence and properties of material bodies in the external world, he could not
              doubt the contents of his sense experience—of how things appeared to his senses.
              Consequently, even if his judgment that he was sitting by a bright and crackling
              fire was false because he was dreaming this while asleep in bed, he could at least
              be certain that this was how things appeared to his consciousness (1641/1985,
              p. 19). In this view, as long as we restrict our judgments to the contents of our
              consciousness they are immune from error. We err only when we make inferences
              about material bodies in the external world on the basis of our sense experience.




gre58624_ch04.indd    129                                                                                             12/14/07   2:55:34 PM
          130 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                                The view that our knowledge of mental states is direct and certain was main-
                           tained by most psychologists and philosophers throughout the succeeding centu-
                           ries and remained popular until the early decades of the 20th century. Empiricists
                           such as John Locke (1632–1704), George Berkeley (1685–1753), and David Hume
                           (1711–1776), who rejected Descartes’ rationalist claims about innate ideas and the
                           rational intuition of fundamental scientific principles and maintained that all our
                           ideas and knowledge are derived from experience, also embraced this account of
                           self-knowledge of mental states.
                                Descartes also articulated the problem about our knowledge of the external
                           world that vexed later empiricists: What justification do we have for making infer-
                           ences about the existence and properties of material bodies in the external world
                           on the basis of our sense experience? How do we know that there are material
                           bodies in the external world that have the colors and shapes that we attribute to
                           them on the basis of sense experience? This was not a problem generated by the
                           mere possibility of doubting the existence and properties of material bodies in the
                           external world, but was a product of Descartes’ treatment of thoughts and ideas as
                           images.
                                Descartes characterized the problem about our knowledge of the existence
                           and properties of material bodies in the external world as a problem about the
                           justification of our belief that our ideas of material bodies and their properties
                           resemble material bodies and their properties:

                               But the chief question at this point concerns the ideas which I take to be derived from
                               things existing outside me: what is my reason for thinking that these resemble these
                               things?
                                                                                                   —(1641/1985, p. 26)

                                This was a serious problem for Descartes, since his commitment to the distinc-
                           tion between primary and secondary qualities forced him to acknowledge that it
                           was doubtful if our ideas of secondary qualities resemble the real qualities of mate-
                           rial bodies:

                               There may be a difference between the sensation we have of light (i.e. the idea of
                               light which is formed in our imagination by the mediation of our eyes) and what is
                               in the objects that produces that sensation within us (i.e. what is in the flame or the
                               sun that we call by the name “light”). For although everyone is commonly convinced
                               that the ideas we have in our minds are wholly similar to the objects from which they
                               proceed, nevertheless I cannot see any reason which assures us that this is so.
                                                                                                   —(1664/1985, p. 81)

                               Later empiricists such as Locke, Berkeley, and Hume shared Descartes’ con-
                           ception of thoughts and ideas as images. They also recognized that this caused




gre58624_ch04.indd   130                                                                                                 12/14/07   2:55:34 PM
                                                                                          MAN THE MACHINE   131


              a problem for the justification of our claims to have knowledge of the existence
              and properties of material bodies in the external world, since we cannot directly
              compare imagistic thoughts with external reality, in the way that we can compare
              a representational painting to the actual physical scene it is intended to represent
              (a painting of the Grand Canal in Venice with the actual Grand Canal in Venice,
              for example). This conception of thoughts as images remained popular for many
              centuries, and impeded the development of a psychology of thought until the
              early 20th century.
                   Nevertheless, Descartes also deserves credit for being one of the earliest theo-
              rists to recognize that thoughts cannot be equated with images. He noted that
              although we can conceive of both a triangle and a chiliagon (a figure with a thou-
              sand sides) and can form an image of a triangle, we cannot form an image of a
              chiliagon (1641/1985, p. 50).



              La Mettrie: Machine Man

              Descartes had taken the revolutionary step of extending the principles of mech-
              anistic explanation to all animal and some human behavior by treating such
              behavior as the product of matter in motion, but had resisted extending these
              principles to the human mind, whose material basis he denied. The French mili-
              tary physician Julien Offroy de La Mettrie had no such qualms and boldly declared
              that “man is a machine” and “there is in the whole universe only one diversely
              modified substance” (1748/1996, p. 39).
                   A native of Brittany, La Mettrie received his medical education at the Uni-
              versity of Leiden in Holland. He practiced as a physician in Leiden for a number
              of years, publishing papers on smallpox, venereal disease, and vertigo until
              commissioned as an army physician during the Franco-Austrian war. He is
              reputed to have developed his materialist views as a consequence of a fever
              contracted during the siege of Freiburg: The disorders of thought and emotion
              induced by the fever left a lasting impression on him. La Mettrie published
              The Natural History of the Soul in 1745, in which he argued that humans are
              complex animals. This work created such an uproar amongst the French clergy
              that La Mettrie was forced to return to Holland. In 1748 he produced his major
              work Man Machine, in which he argued that the principles of mechanistic expla-
              nation should be extended to all human behavior, including human thought
              and language. When the blatant materialism and implicit atheism of this work
              proved too much even for the enlightened Dutch, La Mettrie moved to Berlin at
              the invitation of Frederick the Great, who became his biographer. There he died
              prematurely, through hedonistic overindulgence, according to his meaner crit-
              ics. He expired during a bout of indigestion brought on by a surfeit of pheasant
              and truffles.




gre58624_ch04.indd   131                                                                                    12/14/07   2:55:34 PM
          132 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           Organized Matter   La Mettrie believed that the organization of matter held the
                           key to the understanding of all animal and human behavior:

                               Since all the soul’s faculties depend so much on the specific organization of the brain
                               and of the whole body that they are clearly nothing but that very organization, the
                               machine is perfectly explained!
                                                                                                    —(1748/1996, p. 26)

                           He claimed that “organized matter is endowed with a motive principle, which
                           alone distinguishes it from unorganized matter” and that the gradations of com-
                           plexity of animal and human behavior are “dictated by the diversity of this organ-
                           ization” (1748, p. 33). He consequently maintained that human thought is an
                           emergent property of matter at a complex level of organization:

                               I believe thought to be so little incompatible with organized matter, that it seems to
                               be one of its properties, like electricity, motive power, impenetrability, extension, etc.
                                                                                                    —(1748/1996, p. 35)

                                The extension of mechanistic explanation to thought was so obvious and
                           natural, according to La Mettrie, that Descartes must have been convinced of it.
                           Although Descartes, who “understood animal nature and was the first to demon-
                           strate perfectly that animals were mere machines,” publicly avowed that mind
                           and body are distinct substances, “it is obvious that it was only a trick, a cunning
                           device to make the theologians swallow the poison hidden behind an analogy
                           that strikes everyone and that they alone cannot see”:

                               For it is precisely that strong analogy which forces all scholars and true judges to
                               admit that, however much these haughty, vain beings . . . may wish to exalt them-
                               selves, they are basically only animals and vertically crawling machines.
                                                                                                    —(1748/1996, p. 35)

                               La Mettrie claimed that the man machine is materially continuous with the
                           animal machine: “From animals to man there is no abrupt transition” (1748/1996,
                           p. 13). He maintained that the man machine differs from the animal machine
                           only in terms of the degree of complexity of its material organization:

                               We can see that there is only one substance in the universe and that man is the most
                               perfect one. He is to the ape and the cleverest animals what Huygen’s planetary clock
                               is to one of Julien Leroy’s watches.
                                                                                               —(1748/1996, pp. 33–34)

                               La Mettrie held that physicians were “the only natural philosophers who have
                           the right to speak on this subject” (1748, p. 5), since only their views were based




gre58624_ch04.indd   132                                                                                                    12/14/07   2:55:35 PM
                                                                                                    MAN THE MACHINE   133


              upon “experience and observation alone” (1748, p. 4). He offered two forms of
              evidence in support of his materialist theory of mind and his claims about the
              continuity between animal and human machines. He documented the effects
              of various ingested substances, such as opium, wine, coffee, and red meat upon
              human thought and emotion and noted how damage caused to the “springs” of
              the human machine by fever or poisoning can produce severe disruption to men-
              tal functioning in the form of delusions and mania. He also appealed to the stud-
              ies in “comparative anatomy” conducted by the Oxford neuroanatomist Thomas
              Willis (1621–1675), author of The Anatomy of the Brain (1664) and Two Discourses
              Concerning the Soul of Beasts (1672):

                     In general, the form and composition of the quadruped’s brain is more or less the
                     same as man’s. Everywhere we find the same shape and the same arrangement, with
                     one essential difference: man, of all the animals, is the one with the largest and most
                     convoluted brain, in relation to the volume of his body. Next come the ape, beaver,
                     elephant, dog, fox, cat, etc.: these are the animals that are most like man, for we can
                     also see in them the same graduated analogy concerning the corpus callosum.
                                                                                     —(1748/1996, pp. 9–10)

                   However, La Mettrie’s appeal to the effects of ingested substances, fever, and
              poisoning on mental functioning hardly established materialism. Although he
              demonstrated that many “states of the soul are . . . related to those of the body”
              (1748/1996, p. 9), regular correlation between mental and bodily states was entirely
              consistent with Descartes’ interactionist dualism and was in fact presupposed by
              it. Although the evidence from comparative anatomy supported the hierarchical
              gradation of human and animal psychology and behavior, it did not demonstrate
              their continuity. Many ancient and medieval theorists acknowledged the hier-
              archical gradation of humans and animals, but maintained that some psycho-
              logical capacities, such as abstract thought and language, are attributable only to
              humans.

              Strong and Weak Continuity La Mettrie avowed two forms of continuity between
              humans and animals, which should be carefully distinguished. One is the weak
              continuity between humans and animals presupposed by materialism: the notion
              that humans and animals, like vegetables and minerals, are composed of the same
              basic material, differently organized. La Mettrie rejected Descartes’ claim that
              humans and animals are fundamentally discontinuous because humans have an
              immaterial mind and animals do not. As he put it,

                     Man is not molded from a more precious clay; nature has used one and the same
                     dough, merely changing the yeast.
                                                                                        —(1748/1996, p. 20)




gre58624_ch04.indd    133                                                                                             12/14/07   2:55:35 PM
          134 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           Thus he maintained that human thought is materially instantiated in the human
                           brain.
                                However, La Mettrie also argued for strong continuity between human and
                           animal psychology and behavior. He claimed that differences between human
                           and animal psychology and behavior are merely differences in degree and not
                           fundamental differences in kind. According to this view, human psychology
                           and behavior are fundamentally identical to animal psychology and behavior.
                           Human psychology and behavior may be re-identified in other animals, albeit
                           in attenuated form, since human psychology and behavior are merely more
                           complex forms of animal psychology and behavior. Thus La Mettrie argued that
                           thought and language could be attributed to animals, although in attenuated
                           form.
                                However, the weak continuity of materialism does not entail the strong con-
                           tinuity of human and animal psychology and behavior, any more than the weak
                           continuity of the inorganic and organic presupposed by materialism entails strong
                           continuity of structure and function between the inorganic and organic. Rocks
                           and plants are both composed of organized matter, but plants have properties,
                           such as the ability to perform photosynthesis, that are not instantiated to any
                           degree in rocks. Consequently, although humans and animals are both composed
                           of organized matter, it might still be the case that humans have some psychologi-
                           cal capacities, such as the capacity for abstract thought or language, that are not
                           instantiated to any degree in animals. Whether or not the capacity for abstract
                           thought or language is in fact instantiated in animals is a separate empirical
                           matter.
                                The weak continuity of materialism and strong continuity between human
                           and animal psychology and behavior became associated historically because
                           Descartes rejected both materialism and strong continuity and because most
                           later evolutionary theorists, comparative psychologists, and behaviorists were
                           materialists who, like La Mettrie, affirmed strong continuity. However, there is
                           no intrinsic connection between materialism and strong continuity. Aristotle and
                           other ancient and medieval theorists affirmed the weak continuity of materialism
                           but denied strong continuity between human and animal psychology and behav-
                           ior, as did the comparative psychologist Conwy Lloyd Morgan and the behaviorist
                           psychologist John B. Watson, who were both materialists but maintained that
                           only humans have the capacity for language.

                           Animals and Language      Although it was not mandated by his materialism, La
                           Mettrie maintained that human and animal psychology and behavior are strongly
                           continuous. He acknowledged that only humans speak a language, but denied
                           that machines and animals are incapable of learning a language. He believed
                           that language is the product of intelligence and learning, which he held to be a
                           function of brain size. Given the anatomical and behavioral similarities between




gre58624_ch04.indd   134                                                                                     12/14/07   2:55:35 PM
                                                                                                       MAN THE MACHINE   135


              apes and humans, La Mettrie was convinced that apes are capable of learning
              language:

                     The similarity of the ape’s structure and functions is such that I hardly doubt at all that
                     if this animal were perfectly trained, we would succeed in teaching him to utter sounds
                     and consequently to learn a language. Then he would no longer be a wild man, nor an
                     imperfect man, but a perfect man, a little man of the town, with as much substance or
                     muscle for thinking and taking advantage of his education as we have.
                                                                                           —(1748/1996, p. 12)


              He suggested teaching apes language using the techniques developed by J. C.
              Amman (1700/1965) for teaching sign language to deaf-mutes. In the 20th cen-
              tury, Allen and Beatrice Gardner used similar techniques to teach the sign lan-
              guage of the deaf to chimpanzees (Gardner & Gardner, 1969).
                  La Mettrie claimed that the linguistic competencies of humans, like their
              developed forms of social and cultural behavior, are based upon interpersonal
              imitation or “mimicry,” a form of reflexive learning that is as automatic as the
              pupillary reflex:

                     We take everything—gestures, accents, etc.—from those we live with, in the same way
                     as the eyelid blinks under the threat of a blow that is foreseen, or as the body of a spec-
                     tator imitates mechanically, and despite himself, all the movements of a good mime.
                                                                                            —(1748/1996, p. 9)


              He maintained that animals are also capable of imitation or “mimicry,” and noted
              how a monkey can learn “to put on and take off his little hat or to ride a trained
              dog” (1748/1996, p. 13). Similar accounts of imitative learning formed the basis
              of the theories of social behavior developed by Gustav Le Bon (1841–1931) and
              Gabriel Tarde (1843–1904) in the late 19th century, which played a major role
              in shaping the development of 20th-century American social psychology. Like
              20th-century behaviorist psychologists, La Mettrie believed that the same basic
              principles of learning applied to animals and humans and that these principles
              could be exploited to improve their condition through training and education.


              God, Nature, and Morality Although La Mettrie affirmed the probability of the
              existence of a “supreme Being” (1748/1996, p. 22), he denied that it vouchsafed
              the doctrines of any established religion. He was scornful of academic arguments
              for the existence of God, particularly those based upon the diversity and functional
              adaptation of animal species, and the apparently purposive nature of biological
              development. He acknowledged that it was unlikely that such features were the
              product of blind chance, but claimed that “destroying chance does not prove the




gre58624_ch04.indd    135                                                                                                12/14/07   2:55:35 PM
          136 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           existence of a supreme Being” (1748/1996, p. 24). La Mettrie suggested another
                           alternative, that functionality and apparent teleology are simply a product of the
                           ordered development of nature itself:

                               The eye sees only because it happens to be organized and placed as it is; and that,
                               given the same rules of movement followed by nature in the generation and devel-
                               opment of bodies, it was not possible for that wonderful organ to be organized and
                               placed otherwise.
                                                                                                 —(1748/1996, p. 25)

                           Certainly La Mettrie took seriously the possibility that there is no purpose or
                           design informing human existence:

                               Who knows after all whether the reason for man’s existence is not his existence itself.
                               Perhaps he was thrown by chance on a point on the earth’s surface without being
                               able to say how or why, but simply that he has to live and die, like mushrooms which
                               appear from one day to the next, or flowers which grow beside ditches and cover
                               walls.
                                                                                                 —(1748/1996, p. 23)

                                Such an uncompromising materialist and mechanistic conception appeared
                           to paint a very bleak picture of human nature. It suggested that humans are no
                           better than animals, concerned only with the satisfaction of sensual desires, espe-
                           cially given La Mettrie’s celebration of the sexual nature of the human machine.
                           This was precisely the consequence of treating men as machines that Descartes
                           had feared.
                                Yet La Mettrie was rather more sanguine about the prospects for human-
                           ity. He questioned the common assumption that humans are morally superior
                           to animals, noting that animals rarely murder or torture each other or engage
                           in religious wars and claimed that some animals are capable of moral emotions
                           such as remorse. More significantly, he stressed that a materialist and mechanistic
                           account of human thought and behavior does not preclude human virtue, since it
                           treats human virtue as a product of material organization on a par with thought
                           and digestion:

                               Since thought clearly develops with the organs, why should not the matter that com-
                               poses them not also be capable of remorse once it has acquired, with time, the faculty
                               of feeling? . . .
                                    Given the slightest principle of movement, animate bodies will have everything
                               they need to move, feel, think, repent, and in a word, behave in the physical sphere
                               and in the moral sphere which depends upon it.
                                                                                                 —(1748/1996, p. 26)




gre58624_ch04.indd   136                                                                                                 12/14/07   2:55:36 PM
                                                                                                         MAN THE MACHINE   137


              According to La Mettrie, there is no special reason to suppose that human machines
              would pursue their own selfish interests at the expense of others. On the contrary:

                     The materialist, convinced, whatever his vanity might object, that he is only a machine
                     or an animal, will not ill-treat his fellows. . . . Following the law of nature given to all
                     animals, he does not want to do to others what he would not like others to do to him.
                                                                                             —(1748/1996, p. 39)

                   Although La Mettrie’s work had a major impact in the 18th century, his name
              became associated with such odium that he was rarely cited and consequently had
              little effect on the later development of psychology. Although his commitment to
              strong continuity presaged a fundamental principle of evolutionary theory and
              behaviorist psychology, later evolutionists and behaviorist psychologists seem to
              have been unaware of his work. When Thomas Huxley (1825–1895) addressed
              the British Association in Belfast in 1874 on “The Hypothesis That Animals Are
              Automata, and Its History,” he gave due credit to Descartes but made no mention
              of La Mettrie (Boakes, 1984).

              Thomas Hobbes: Empiricism, Materialism, and Individualism

              The Englishman Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) shared La Mettrie’s materialist vision
              of human psychology but took a rather more pessimistic view of its implications.
              Born in Malmesbury, England, Hobbes was educated at Oxford University and served
              as Francis Bacon’s secretary for a short period. He entered the employment of Wil-
              liam Cavendish, third Earl of Devonshire, and for most of the rest of his life served
              as secretary and tutor to the family. This put him in some danger during the period
              leading up to the English Civil War. Hobbes fled to France in 1640 and did not return
              until 1651. He made several tours of Europe, where he met many of the leading
              theorists of his day, such as Galileo and Descartes, with whom he became friends. He
              lived to age 91, producing translations of Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey at age 87.
                   Hobbes’s main interests were political, and his major work Leviathan (1651) is
              primarily an argument in favor of absolute monarchy. His aim was to devise a politi-
              cal system capable of avoiding the horrors of civil war, having been greatly affected
              by the English Civil War, albeit at a distance. His psychological theories are mainly to
              be found in On Human Nature (1640) and the preliminary chapters of Leviathan.
                   Hobbes claimed that his psychological interests were aroused after having
              read Euclid’s Elements at age 40; it induced his reverence for the self-contained
              axiomatic systems of geometry. Consequently, he tried to deduce his claims about
              human psychology and society from a number of self-evident axioms, based upon
              the principles of the new mechanistic science. Although Hobbes followed Des-
              cartes in adopting a deductive approach to explanation, he rejected Descartes’
              rationalist account of knowledge and denied the existence of innate ideas.




gre58624_ch04.indd    137                                                                                                  12/14/07   2:55:36 PM
          138 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                              Hobbes was a psychological empiricist who maintained that all our ideas or
                           concepts are derived from sense experience:

                               The original of them all is that which we call sense; for there is no conception in
                               a man’s mind which hath not at first, totally, or by parts, been begotten upon the
                               organs of sense. The rest are derived from that original.
                                                                                                         —(1651/1966, p. 1)


                                Hobbes was also committed to the homogeneity of cognition and sense per-
                           ception: He claimed that the difference between cognition and sense perception
                           is a matter of degree (of intensity), but not a fundamental difference in kind. On
                           this account, thinking of a tree in blossom is like seeing and smelling a tree in
                           blossom, only fainter. Hobbes agreed with Descartes that ideas are like pictorial
                           images, since he maintained, with later empiricists, that our ideas are copies or
                           faint images of sense impressions of objects:

                               For after the object is removed, or the eye shut, we still retain an image of the thing
                               seen, though more obscure than when we see it. . . . Imagination therefore is nothing
                               more than decaying sense.
                                                                                                         —(1651/1966, p. 4)


                                Hobbes derived his first principles from the materialism of the new mechanis-
                           tic science. Adopting a reductive explanatory approach to human psychology, he
                           claimed that mental states and processes are “nothing really, but motion in some
                           internal substance of the head”:

                               which motion not stopping there, but proceeding to the heart, of necessity must
                               either help or hinder the motion which is called vital; when it helpeth, it is called
                               delight, contentment, or pleasure, which is nothing really but motion about the
                               heart, as conception is nothing but motion in the head; and the objects that cause it
                               are called pleasant or delightful.
                                                                                                        —(1640/1966, p. 31)


                           Hobbes also embraced a form of psychological hedonism, according to which all
                           human behavior is determined by the desire to attain pleasure and avoid pain:

                               This motion, in which consisteth pleasure or pain, is also a solicitation or provocation
                               either to draw near the thing that pleaseth, or to retire from the thing that displeaseth;
                               and this solicitation is the endeavor or internal beginning of animal motion, which when
                               the object delighteth, is called appetite; and when it displeaseth, it is called aversion.
                                                                                                        —(1640/1966, p. 31)




gre58624_ch04.indd   138                                                                                                      12/14/07   2:55:36 PM
                                                                                                      MAN THE MACHINE   139


                   Hobbes famously claimed that the
              unbridled pursuit of selfish interest would
              inevitably lead to the war “of every man,
              against every man” and that in such a
              “state of nature” the life of man would
              be “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and
              short” (1651/1966, p. 113). He believed
              that humans embrace systems of civic
              government out of self-interest, in order
              to avoid these anticipated consequences.
              He argued that an absolute monarchy, in
              which individuals abandon their rights
              to a sovereign power, is the most just and
              efficient form of government, although
              he maintained that any form of govern-
              ment is better than none.
                   Hobbes’s explanatory reductionism
              is also manifest in his individualism,
              which formed the basis of his account of
              social community in Leviathan. According
              to Hobbes, societies or social groups are
              nothing more than collections of human
              individuals, and social behavior is noth-
              ing more than the aggregate behavior of
              collections of human individuals, deter-
              mined by their pursuit of pleasure and
              avoidance of pain. This individualistic
              conception of the social was characteristic
              of later empiricist concepts of the social, Frontispiece of Hobbes’s Leviathan (1651). Body of state
              from Adam Smith (1723–1790) to Floyd represented as aggregation of individual persons.
              Allport (1890–1978), who determined the
              course of American social psychology in
              the early 20th century (Katz, 1991).
                   In advancing these materialist and mechanistic explanations of human psy-
              chology and behavior, Hobbes denied that humans have free will. He claimed that
              the “will” is just the most powerful appetite, or efficient cause, and is the same in
              animals and men. He thus reduced final causation in the realm of human psychol-
              ogy and behavior to efficient causation:

                     A final cause has no place but in such things as have sense and will, and this also I . . .
                     prove . . . to be an efficient cause.
                                                                                         —(1655/1966, p. 132)




gre58624_ch04.indd    139                                                                                               12/14/07   2:55:36 PM
          140 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                                Like La Mettrie, Hobbes was condemned by the religious establishment for
                           his materialist views. He was denied admission to the newly formed Royal Society,
                           which is perhaps not that surprising, since although he was a vigorous advocate
                           of the new mechanistic science, he did not make any substantive contribution to
                           it. He did, however, take the first step in extending mechanistic forms of explana-
                           tion to mental processes. He offered tentative explanations of “trains of thought,”
                           likening the “coherence” of thought to the “coherence” of matter. He suggested
                           that ideas derived from sense experience are connected in our memory by their
                           conjunction in our sense experience:

                               The cause of the coherence or consequence of one conception to another, is their first
                               coherence or consequence at that time when they are produced by sense.
                                                                                                  —(1640/1966, p. 15)


                               Hobbes is sometimes treated as the father of British empiricism and the
                           founder of what later came to be known as associationist psychology. Yet although
                           he was the first to clearly articulate many of the distinctive principles of British
                           empiricism, such as the principles of psychological empiricism and the homoge-
                           neity of cognition and sense perception, and did suggest a mechanistic treatment
                           of the association of thought, his contribution was more programmatic than sub-
                           stantive. It was John Locke who detailed the origin of complex ideas in sense
                           experience and David Hume and David Hartley (1705–1757) who developed the
                           principles of association that grounded the later development of associationist
                           psychology.


                           MENTAL MECHANISM AND STIMULUSRESPONSE
                           PSYCHOLOGY
                           By the end of the 17th century the triumph of mechanism was complete in the
                           physical sciences, and mechanistic explanation was extended to human psychol-
                           ogy and behavior in the 18th and 19th centuries. However, this did not lead
                           to a progressive acceptance of materialism, as might have been expected. Most
                           of those who developed mechanistic explanations of mental states and proc-
                           esses did their best to avoid any association with materialism. Even those who
                           explored the material basis of mentality in the brain avowed a form of dualism or
                           a neutral parallelism, by maintaining that every mental state is correlated with
                           a brain state, while carefully avoiding speculation about the basis of the correla-
                           tion between mental and brain states. Although the power of organized religion
                           declined over these centuries, the religious establishment still played a powerful
                           role within society and civic administration, often determining royal or govern-
                           ment patronage and university positions.




gre58624_ch04.indd   140                                                                                                12/14/07   2:55:37 PM
                                                             MENTAL MECHANISM AND STIMULUSRESPONSE PSYCHOLOGY    141


                  One of the peculiarities of Descartes’ pioneering account of reflexive behavior
              in animals and humans was that he presumed that the nerves from sensory recep-
              tors are connected in the brain to the nerves that control motor behavior, even
              though it was common knowledge that animals often continue to display reflex-
              ive behavior after decapitation. For example, La Mettrie noted how

                     A drunken soldier cut off the head of a turkey-cock with a sabre. The animal stayed
                     upright, then it walked and ran; when it hit the wall it turned around, beat its wings,
                     still running, and finally fell down.
                                                                                         —(1748/1996, p. 27)

                  The English clergyman Stephen Hales (1677–1761) demonstrated that decapi-
              tated frogs continue to respond to stimulation so long as the marrow of their spi-
              nal cord remains intact (La Mettrie’s Man Machine was provocatively dedicated to
              Hales). Robert Whytt (1714–1766), who taught in the medical school at the Uni-
              versity of Edinburgh, confirmed these results in a careful series of experiments:

                     When any of the muscles of the leg of a frog are irritated some time after cutting off
                     its head, almost all the muscles belonging to the legs and thighs are brought into
                     contraction, if the spinal marrow be entire.
                                                                               —(cited in Smith, 1992, p. 74)

              He also noted that decapitation enhances reflexive activity (Smith, 1992) and that
              some reflexes can be preserved even if only a small portion of the spinal cord
              remains intact (Boakes, 1984).
                  Whytt maintained that such experiments demonstrated that

                     a certain power of influence lodged in the brain, spinal marrow, and nerves, is either
                     the immediate cause of the contraction of muscles of animals, or at least necessary to it.
                                                                                          —(1751/1978, p. 3)

              He claimed that decapitated animals respond selectively to stimulation and noted
              how a brainless frog will use its legs to relieve the irritation caused by an acid-
              soaked tissue applied to its skin, just as many intact animals use their legs to rid
              themselves of fleas and ticks (Reed, 1997).
                   Whytt suggested that such experiments demonstrated the existence of an
              unconscious “sensitive soul” in the spinal cord, capable of making adaptive
              responses to sensory stimulation. Like Thomas Willis, the Oxford neuroanatomist,
              he suggested that mentality is distributed throughout the nervous system and not
              restricted to the brain. This suggestion generated opposition as fierce as that for
              La Mettrie’s claim that mentality is a property of the brain. However, it indirectly
              stimulated many 19th-century neurophysiologists, who often saw themselves as




gre58624_ch04.indd    141                                                                                         12/14/07   2:55:38 PM
          142 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           opponents of such crass materialism, to locate mentality in the higher regions of
                           the brain, such as the cerebral cortex.
                                In his Essay on the Vital and Other Involuntary Motions of Animals (1751), Whytt
                           identified a range of innate reflexive behavior, such as digestion, coughing, sneez-
                           ing, and penile erection (Boakes, 1984). He introduced the notion of a stimulus
                           into the theoretical vocabulary, defined as the application of any form of physical
                           energy to a nerve (Reed, 1997). He also noted how certain originally neutral stim-
                           uli can acquire the capacity to generate innate reflexes by association with their
                           precipitating stimuli (Boakes, 1984), anticipating Pavlov’s account of conditioned
                           reflexes, including the form of conditioned salivation that became the primary
                           focus of his experimental studies:

                               Thus the sight, or even the recalled idea of grateful food causes an uncommon flow of
                               spittle into the mouth of a hungry person; and the seeing of a lemon cut produces the
                               same effect in many people.
                                                                                     —(cited in Boakes, 1984, p. 95)




                           DISCUSSION QUESTIONS

                            1. Bacon claimed that scientific theories should be judged by the utility of
                               their “works” or “discoveries” and that genuine scientific knowledge leads
                               to “dominion” over nature. What useful works or discoveries have scientific
                               psychological theories promoted? Is dominion over humans an appropriate
                               goal for scientific psychology? If so, to what degree? In what sense?
                            2. Descartes believed that animals lack sensory awareness and consciousness.
                               Do you? How could you tell? Can you think of a “crucial instance” or “cru-
                               cial experiment” that would demonstrate sensory awareness or conscious-
                               ness in animals? Could a machine have sensory awareness or consciousness?
                               How could you tell?
                            3. Does thinking of animals as machines incline us to think they are more or
                               less likely to be capable of language and problem solving?
                            4. Does materialism imply strong continuity between human and animal psy-
                               chology and behavior?
                            5. Hobbes was an individualist about social community. Are social attitudes
                               and behavior just the common attitudes and behavior of a collection of indi-
                               viduals? Is contemporary social psychology individualist, or does it conceive
                               of social attitudes and behavior as something more than (or different from)
                               the aggregation of attitudes and behavior?




gre58624_ch04.indd   142                                                                                               12/14/07   2:55:38 PM
                                                                                                 GLOSSARY   143


              GLOSSARY

              automaton A moving machine.
              corpuscle Seventeenth-century term for the atomistic components of material
                 bodies, coined by Robert Boyle.
              corpuscularian theory of light Theory of light in which it is treated as a
                 stream of material corpuscles, or atoms.
              epicycles A system of circles within circles introduced by Ptolemy (and
                 Copernicus) to accommodate the “wandering” motion of planets.
              geocentric theory The theory that Earth is the fixed center of the universe,
                 around which the sun and other planets orbit.
              heliocentric theory The theory that the sun is the fixed center of the uni-
                  verse, around which Earth and other planets orbit.
              homogeneity of cognition and sense perception The claim that cogni-
                tion and sense perception differ in degree (of intensity) but not fundamental
                kind, usually via the claim that ideas are weaker images of sense impressions.
              Idols of the cave Cognitive biases in scientific thinking that are idiosyncratic
                 products of individual human development.
              Idols of the marketplace Social biases in scientific thinking based upon
                 notions derived from common linguistic usage.
              Idols of the theatre Social biases in scientific thinking based upon theories
                 maintained by schools of philosophy as received dogma.
              Idols of the tribe Cognitive biases in scientific thinking based upon innate
                 human propensities.
              individualism The view that societies or social groups are nothing more
                 than collections of human individuals and that social behavior is
                 nothing more than the aggregate behavior of collections of human
                 individuals.
              Instance of the Fingerpost Francis Bacon’s name for a crucial instance that
                 enables the empirical adjudication of competing theories.
              interactionism The view that mind and body causally interact.
              introspective knowledge The conscious apprehension of mental states, usu-
                  ally held to be direct and certain.
              mechanistic explanation Efficient causal explanation in terms of antecedent
                conditions sufficient to produce an effect, often associated with a conception
                of the universe as a giant (usually clockwork) machine.
              neutral parallelism The view that every mental state is correlated with a
                 brain state, without commitment to any theory about the nature of the
                 relation between mental and brain states.




gre58624_ch04.indd   143                                                                                    12/14/07   2:55:38 PM
          144 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           occasionalism The view that God directly causes the regular correlation
                              between mental and bodily states.
                           pre-established harmony The view that God maintains the regular correla-
                              tion between mental and bodily states.
                           psychological hedonism The view that all human behavior is motivated by
                              the desire to attain pleasure and avoid pain.
                           reflexive behavior Automatic and involuntary behavior in response to stimu-
                               lation.
                           Reformation The Protestant religious movement founded by Martin Luther.
                           Renaissance The cultural movement that began in southern Italy in the 14th
                              century and promoted innovative developments in art, literature, architec-
                              ture, and music, as well as in mathematics, religion, and science.
                           Renaissance humanism The Renaissance focus on human psychology and
                              celebration of its potential.
                           stellar parallax The variation in the angular separation of the stars that was a
                               crucial implication of the Copernican heliocentric theory.
                           stimulus Term introduced by the Edinburgh physician Thomas Whytt to
                               describe the application of any form of physical energy to a nerve.
                           strong continuity The view that the differences between human and animal
                               psychology and behavior are differences in degree and not fundamental dif-
                               ferences in kind.
                           vital force An emergent force of organized matter held to explain biological
                               functions such as bodily heat and movement.
                           vortex theory of motion Descartes’ theory of motion in terms of “action by
                              contact.”
                           weak continuity The view that humans and animals are composed of the
                              same basic material, differently organized.



                           REFERENCES

                           Amman, J. C. (1965). A dissertation on speech (C. Baker, Trans.). Amsterdam:
                              North-Holland. (Original work published 1700; original translation 1873)
                           Bacon, F. (1966). New Atlantis. In The advancement of learning and New Atlantis.
                              Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Original work published 1627)
                           Bacon, F. (1994). Novum organum (P. Urbach & J. Gibson, Eds. & Trans.). Chicago,
                              IL: Open Court. (Original work published 1620)
                           Bandrés, J., & Llavona, R. (1992). Minds and machines in Renaissance Spain:
                              Gómez Pereira’s theory of animal behavior. Journal of the History of the Behav-
                              ioral Sciences, 28, 158–168.




gre58624_ch04.indd   144                                                                                        12/14/07   2:55:38 PM
                                                                                                    REFERENCES   145


              Bazerman, C. (1988). Reporting the experiment: The changing account of scien-
                  tific doings in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 1665–1800. In
                  C. Bazerman, Shaping scientific knowledge: The genre and activity of the experi-
                  mental article in science. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
              Boakes, R. (1984). From Darwin to behaviorism: Psychology and the minds of ani-
                  mals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
              Boden, M. (2003). The creative mind: Myths and mechanisms. New York: Routledge.
              Brett, G. S. (1912–1921). A history of psychology (Vols. 1–3). London: Macmillan.
              Bruno, G. (1950). On the infinite universe and worlds. In D. W. Singer, Giordano
                  Bruno: His life and thought. New York: Schuman. (Original work published
                  1584)
              Buchdahl, G. (1969). Metaphysics and the philosophy of science. Oxford: Blackwell.
              Clark, D. (1982). Descartes’ philosophy of science. Manchester, England:
                  Manchester University Press.
              Clemens, R. D. (1967). Physiological-psychological thought in Juan Luis Vives.
                  Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 3, 219–235.
              Copernicus, N. (1976). On the revolutions of the heavenly spheres (A. M. Duncan,
                  Trans.). New York: Barnes & Noble. (Original work published 1543)
              Descartes, R. (1985). Discourse on the method. In J. Cottingham, R. Stoothhoff,
                  & D. Murdoch (Trans.), The philosophical writings of Descartes (Vol. 1).
                  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Original work published 1637)
              Descartes, R. (1985). Meditations on first philosophy. In J. Cottingham, R.
                  Stoothhoff, & D. Murdoch (Trans.), The philosophical writings of Descartes
                  (Vol. 2). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Original work published
                  1641)
              Descartes, R. (1985). Search after truth. In J. Cottingham, R. Stoothhoff, & D.
                  Murdoch (Trans.), The philosophical writings of Descartes (Vol. 2). Cambridge:
                  Cambridge University Press. (Original work published 1643)
              Descartes, R. (1985). The passions of the soul. In J. Cottingham, R. Stoothhoff,
                  & D. Murdoch (Trans.), The philosophical writings of Descartes (Vol. 1).
                  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Original work published 1649)
              Descartes, R. (1985). The world. In J. Cottingham, R. Stoothhoff, & D. Murdoch
                  (Trans.), The philosophical writings of Descartes (Vol. 1). Cambridge:
                  Cambridge University Press. (Originally published 1664; includes Treatise
                  on Man)
              Dolling, L. M., Gianelli, A. F., & Statile, G. N. (Eds.). (2003). The tests of time:
                  Readings in the development of physical theory. Princeton: Princeton University
                  Press.
              Dreyfus, H. (1992). What computers still can’t do: A critique of artificial intelligence.
                  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
              Erasmus, D. (1979). The praise of folly (C. H. Miller, Trans.). New Haven: Yale
                  University Press. (Original work published 1512)




gre58624_ch04.indd   145                                                                                         12/14/07   2:55:38 PM
          146 CHAPTER 4: THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION


                           Foote, T. (1991). Where Columbus was coming from. Smithsonian (December),
                               28–41.
                           Galileo, G. (1957). Letters on the solar spots. In S. Drake (Trans.), Discoveries and opin-
                               ions of Galileo. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. (Original work published 1613)
                           Galileo, G. (1957). The assayer. In S. Drake (Trans.), Discoveries and opinions of
                               Galileo. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. (Original work published 1623)
                           Galileo, G. (1967). Dialogue concerning the two chief world-systems, Ptolemaic
                               and Copernican (S. Drake, Trans.). Berkeley: University of California Press.
                               (Original work published 1632)
                           Galileo, G. (1974). Dialogues concerning two new sciences (S. Drake, Trans.).
                               Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. (Original work published 1638)
                           Gardner, B. T., & Gardner, R. A. (1969). Teaching language to a chimpanzee.
                               Science, 165, 664–672.
                           Gilbert. W. (1958). On magnetism (P. F. Mottelay, Trans.). New York: Dover.
                               (Original work published 1600)
                           Harvey, W. (1989). On the circulation of the blood. In R. Willis (Trans.), The works
                               of William Harvey. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. (Original
                               work published 1628)
                           Hobbes, T. (1966). Leviathan. In W. Molesworth (Ed.), The English works of Thomas
                               Hobbes. Darmstadt, Germany: Scientia Verlag Aalen. (Original work pub-
                               lished 1651)
                           Hobbes, T. (1966). On human nature. In W. Molesworth (Ed.), The English works of
                               Thomas Hobbes. Darmstadt, Germany: Scientia Verlag Aalen. (Original work
                               published 1640)
                           Hobbes, T. (1966). On matter. In W. Molesworth (Ed.), The English works of Thomas
                               Hobbes. Darmstadt, Germany: Scientia Verlag Aalen. (Original work pub-
                               lished 1655)
                           Katz, D. (1991). Floyd Henry Allport: Founder of social psychology as a behav-
                               ioral science. In G. A. Kimble, M. Wertheimer, & C. White (Eds.), Portraits of
                               pioneers in psychology (Vol. 1). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
                           Lafleur, L. J. (1956). Introduction to Descartes’ Discourse on Method. Indianapolis:
                               Bobbs-Merrill.
                           La Mettrie, J. O. de la. (1996). Machine man. In A. Thompson (Trans. & Ed.),
                               Machine man and other writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                               (Original work published 1748)
                           La Mettrie, J. O. de la. (1996). Natural history of the soul. In A. Thompson (Trans.
                               & Ed.), Machine man and other writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                               Press. (Original work published 1745)
                           Losee, J. (1980). A historical introduction to the philosophy of science. New York:
                               Oxford University Press.
                           Newton, I. (1952). Opticks; or, A treatise of the reflections, refractions, inflections &
                               colors of light. New York: Dover. (Original work published 1704)




gre58624_ch04.indd   146                                                                                                 12/14/07   2:55:39 PM
                                                                                                    REFERENCES   147


              Newton, I. (1969). Mathematical principles of natural philosophy (F. Cajori, Trans.).
                  New York: Greenwood Press. (Original work published 1687)
              Osiander, A. (2003). Preface to N. Copernicus, On the revolutions of the heavenly
                  spheres. In L. M. Dolling, A. F. Gianelli, & G. N. Statile (Eds.), The tests of time:
                  Readings in the development of physical theory. Princeton: Princeton University
                  Press. (Original work published 1543)
              Pyenson, L., & Sheets-Pyenson, S. (1999). Servants of nature: A history of scientific
                  institutions, enterprises, and sensibilities. New York: Norton.
              Reed, E. S. (1997). From soul to mind. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
              Smith, R. (1992). Inhibition: History and meaning in the sciences of mind and brain.
                  Berkeley: University of California Press.
              Wallace, W. A. (1984). Galileo and his sources: The heritage of the Collegio Romano in
                  Galileo’s science. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
              Whytt, R. (1978). An essay on the vital and other involuntary motions of animals.
                  In D. N. Robinson (Ed.), Significant contributions to the history of psychol-
                  ogy, 1750–1920. Series E: Physiological Psychology. Vol. 1. Washington, DC:
                  University Publications of America. (Original work published 1751)
              Willis, T. (1672). Two discourses concerning the soul of brutes. London.
              Willis, T. (1965). The anatomy of the brain (W. Feindel, Ed.). Montreal: McGill
                  University Press. (Original work published 1664)




gre58624_ch04.indd   147                                                                                         12/14/07   2:55:39 PM
                           C H A P T E R          5
                                                      4
                                           The Newtonian Psychologists

                           T    HE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION REPRESENTED THE
                                vanguard of the Enlightenment, that period in European thought in the 17th
                           and 18th centuries when confidence in human reason and experience gradually
                           came to supersede faith in religion and traditional authority. One central feature
                           of Enlightenment thought, which flourished in France, Scotland, England, and
                           Germany, was a commitment to human progress and an optimistic belief in the
                           applicability of scientific knowledge, including social and psychological knowl-
                           edge, to the improvement of the human condition. The Enlightenment saw the
                           emergence of more liberal, secular, and utilitarian concepts of humanity and the
                           development of more democratic societies, such as the United States. Although
                           not universally embraced, these Enlightenment ideals continue to inform con-
                           temporary confidence in the theoretical progress and social utility of the sciences,
                           including social and psychological science.
                               The rejection of the Aristotelian tradition was good news for the natural sci-
                           ences. The rejection of Aristotle’s geocentric theory and final causal explanations
                           of motion led to advances in astronomy and physics. However, it was not so obvi-
                           ously good news for psychology. One of the casualties of the scientific revolution
                           was Aristotle’s biologically grounded functional psychology, which came to be
                           replaced by a variety of mechanistic psychological theories. This was not the intent
                           of the pioneers of the new science, such as Galileo, Bacon, and Newton. Although
                           they maintained that final causal explanation has no place in physical science,
                           most recognized that final causal explanation is entirely appropriate in the realm
                           of human and animal behavior. Yet this qualification was generally ignored by the
                           protopsychologists of the 17th and 18th centuries, who tried to create a science
                           of psychology based upon the mechanistic forms of efficient causal explanation
                           characteristic of the new science, for which Newton’s physics came to serve as a
                           paradigm.
                               Newton’s theory of universal gravitation was hugely influential, not only
                           in physical science, where it continued to reign supreme throughout the 18th
                           and 19th centuries, but also with respect to the forms of psychological theory
                           that developed during these centuries. These were either attempts to model psy-
                           chological theory upon Newtonian science, such as associationist psychology, or
          148




gre58624_ch05.indd   148                                                                                      12/14/07   2:57:01 PM
